The Project Gutenberg eBook of Butterflies and Moths, Shown to the Children
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Butterflies and Moths, Shown to the Children


Author: Theodore Wood

Editor: Louey Chisholm

Illustrator: Janet Harvey Kelman

Release date: November 5, 2021 [eBook #66668]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: T. C. & E. C. Jack, Ltd, 1909

Credits: D A Alexander, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by Cornell University Digital Collections)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS, SHOWN TO THE CHILDREN ***




THE “SHOWN TO THE CHILDREN” SERIES


  1. BEASTS

  With 48 Coloured Plates by PERCY J.
  BILLINGHURST. Letterpress by LENA
  DALKEITH.

  2. FLOWERS

  With 48 Coloured Plates showing 150
  flowers, by JANET HARVEY KELMAN.
  Letterpress by C. E. SMITH.

  3. BIRDS

  With 48 Coloured Plates by M. K.
  C. SCOTT. Letterpress by J. A. HENDERSON.

  4. THE SEA-SHORE

  With 48 Coloured Plates by JANET
  HARVEY KELMAN. Letterpress by
  Rev. THEODORE WOOD.

  5. THE FARM

  With 48 Coloured Plates by F. M. B.
  and A. H. BLAIKIE. Letterpress by
  FOSTER MEADOW.

  6. TREES

  With 32 Coloured Plates by JANET
  HARVEY KELMAN. Letterpress by C.
  E. SMITH.

  7. NESTS AND EGGS

  With 48 Coloured Plates by A. H.
  BLAIKIE. Letterpress by J. A. HENDERSON.

  8. BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS

  With 48 Coloured Plates by JANET
  HARVEY KELMAN. Letterpress by
  Rev. THEODORE WOOD.

  9. STARS

  By ELLISON HAWKS.




THE “SHOWN TO THE CHILDREN” SERIES

EDITED BY LOUEY CHISHOLM




BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS


[Illustration: PLATE I

  1. Silver-washed Fritillary
  2. Pearl-bordered Fritillary]




  Butterflies and
  Moths

  SHOWN TO THE CHILDREN

  BY

  JANET HARVEY KELMAN

  DESCRIBED BY

  REV. THEODORE WOOD

  [Illustration]

  FORTY-EIGHT COLOURED PICTURES

  LONDON: T. C. & E. C. JACK
  NEW YORK: THE PLATT & PECK CO.




A large number of the butterflies and moths in this book were drawn
from insects in Mr. R. J. M. M‘Kerrell’s private collection, and the
artist wishes to thank him most cordially for his great kindness.




PREFACE


In this little book I want to tell you something about the common
butterflies and moths which you may find in almost all parts of the
country. But, first of all, I think that perhaps I had better say
something about what we generally call their “life-history.”

Of course you know that butterflies and moths are not butterflies and
moths to begin with. They enter the world in the form of eggs, just
as birds and fishes do. These eggs are often very beautiful indeed.
You may find them on the leaves of different plants, sometimes on
the upper side and sometimes on the lower side. And if you look
at them through a good strong magnifying-glass--or, better still,
through a microscope--you will find that some are shaped like little
sugar-loaves, and some like acorns, and some like tiny melons, while
they are nearly always covered with raised patterns which one might
almost think must have been cut by fairy chisels.

In course of time these eggs hatch, and out come a number of little
caterpillars, which at once begin to eat the leaves of the plant on
which the eggs were laid. They have most wonderful appetites, and
hardly ever stop feeding all day long. The consequence is, of course,
that they grow very quickly; and in a few days’ time they find that
their jackets are much too tight for them. Then a most curious thing
happens. Their skins split right down the back, and they wriggle and
twist about, and rub themselves against the surrounding objects, till
at last they manage to creep out of them altogether and appear in new
ones, which had been gradually forming underneath the old!

Wouldn’t it be nice if we could get new suits of clothes, or new
frocks, as easily as this?

As soon as their change of garments is over, the little caterpillars
begin to feed again, as hungrily as before. But after about a week
their new skins are too tight for them, and they have to change them
again! This very often happens six or seven times before they are fully
fed. But at last they stop eating, throw off their skins once more, and
appear as chrysalids.

You may often find these chrysalids on fences and walls, and also on
the stems and leaves of bushes and low plants. Sometimes they are
suspended by the tips of their tails from little silken pads, which the
caterpillars spin for that purpose; and sometimes they are held upright
by silken belts round the middle of their bodies. They cannot see, for
they have no eyes; and they cannot eat, for they have no mouths; and
of course they cannot move about. All that they can do, if you touch
them, is just to wriggle their tails from side to side. And there they
remain, sometimes for weeks and sometimes for months, till the time
comes for the perfect butterflies to make their appearance.

Then, one day, the skins of the chrysalids split open, and out creep
the butterflies. But if you were to see them now you would never guess
what they were, for their wings are so tiny, and so crumpled up, that
you can hardly see them. They climb up to some firm foothold, however,
and then remain perfectly still; and by slow degrees the creases
straighten out, and the wings become larger and larger, and stronger
and stronger, till at last they reach their full size and strength, and
the butterflies, perfect at last, are able to fly away.

That is the “life-history” of a butterfly; and moths are developed
in just the same way, except that very often their caterpillars spin
silken cells, which we call “cocoons,” and turn to chrysalids inside
them. And the chrysalids of moths, remember, are often known as “pupæ.”

Then there are one or two other things about these insects that I
should like to tell you. One is that their wings are covered all over
with very tiny scales.

Of course you know that if you catch a butterfly, and let it go again,
your fingers are covered with a kind of mealy dust. And if you look at
a little of this dust through a microscope you will find that it is
made up of thousands and thousands of the smallest possible scales, all
most beautifully chiselled and sculptured, and each with a slender
little stalk at the base. And if you look at a piece of the butterfly’s
wings through the microscope, you will see that these scales are
arranged upon it in rows, which overlap one another just like the
slates on the roof of a house.

All the colour of a butterfly’s wing is in these scales, and if you rub
them off you will find that the wing itself is as transparent as that
of a bluebottle-fly or a bee.

Then a great many butterflies and moths have a “trunk” or “proboscis”
coiled up underneath the head. This is really a long tube, and when
the insects are hungry they poke it down into a flower, and suck up
the nectar through it. You can see this trunk quite easily if you look
sideways at such a butterfly as a “scarlet admiral” or a “peacock.”

Then there is just one thing more.

No doubt you would like to know how to tell butterflies from moths.
Well, just look at their feelers or “antennæ,” as they are often
called. You will see that those of butterflies are thickened at the
very tips, while those of moths are not. Besides this, the body of a
butterfly is nipped in at the middle much more than that of a moth. And
when a butterfly is at rest it always folds its wings together over its
back, while moths nearly always spread them out, or allow them to hang
down, or wrap them round their bodies.

                                                          THEODORE WOOD.




LIST OF PLATES


  PLATE I

  1. Silver-washed Fritillary
  2. Pearl-bordered Fritillary


  PLATE II

  1. Small Tortoise-shell
  2. Large Tortoise-shell


  PLATE III

  1. Peacock Butterfly
  2. Peacock Caterpillar
  3. Red Admiral Butterfly


  PLATE IV

  1. Painted Lady
  2. Marbled White


  PLATE V

  1. Speckled Wood
  2. Wall


  PLATE VI

  1. Meadow Brown
  2. Ringlet


  PLATE VII

  1. Large Heath
  2. Small Heath


  PLATE VIII

  1. Green Hair Streak
  2. Purple Hair Streak


  PLATE IX

  1. Small Copper
  2. Common Blue


  PLATE X

  1. Brown Argus
  2. Clifton Blue


  PLATE XI

  1. Chalk-hill Blue
  2. Little Blue


  PLATE XII

  1. Azure Blue
  2. Brimstone


  PLATE XIII

  1. Clouded Yellow
  2. Pale Clouded


  PLATE XIV

  1. Swallow-tail
  2. Swallow-tail Caterpillar


  PLATE XV

  1. Orange Tip, male
  2. Orange Tip, female


  PLATE XVI

  1. Large White
  2. Large White Caterpillar
  3. Small White
  4. Small White Caterpillar
  5. Green-veined White, under-side


  PLATE XVII

  1. Grizzled Skipper
  2. Dingy Skipper
  3. Large Skipper
  4. Small Skipper


  PLATE XVIII

  1. Eyed Hawk
  2. Eyed Hawk Caterpillar


  PLATE XIX

  1. Poplar Hawk
  2. Poplar Hawk Caterpillar


  PLATE XX

  1. Lime Hawk
  2. Lime Hawk Caterpillar


  PLATE XXI

  1. Death’s Head
  2. Death’s Head Caterpillar


  PLATE XXII

  1. Privet Hawk
  2. Privet Hawk Caterpillar


  PLATE XXIII

  1. Elephant Hawk
  2. Elephant Hawk Caterpillar
  3. Small Elephant Hawk Moth


  PLATE XXIV

  1. Humming-Bird Hawk
  2. Bee Hawk
  3. Currant Clearwing
  4. Hornet Clearwing


  PLATE XXV

  1. Common Swift
  2. Ghost Swift, male
  3. Ghost Swift, female


  PLATE XXVI

  1. Goat Moth
  2. Goat Caterpillar


  PLATE XXVII

  1. Wood Leopard
  2. Green Forester
  3. Six-Spot Burnet


  PLATE XXVIII

  1. Cinnabar
  2. Cinnabar Caterpillar
  3. White Ermine


  PLATE XXIX

  1. Garden Tiger
  2. Garden Tiger Caterpillar
  3. Cream Spotted Tiger
  4. Cream Spotted Tiger Caterpillar

  PLATE XXX

  1. Gold-Tail
  2. Gold-Tail Caterpillar
  3. Pale Tussock
  4. Pale Tussock Caterpillar


  PLATE XXXI

  1. Lackey
  2. Lackey Caterpillar
  3. Vapourer, male
  4. Vapourer Caterpillar
  5. Vapourer, female


  PLATE XXXII

  1. Oak Eggar
  2. Drinker
  3. Drinker Caterpillar


  PLATE XXXIII

  1. Lappet
  2. Lappet Caterpillar


  PLATE XXXIV

  1. Swallow-tail Moth
  2. Swallow-tail Caterpillar
  3. Emperor
  4. Emperor Caterpillar


  PLATE XXXV

  1. Brimstone
  2. Canary-Shouldered Thorn
  3. Pepper and Salt


  PLATE XXXVI

  1. Willow Beauty
  2. Large Emerald


  PLATE XXXVII

  1. Bordered White, male
  2. Bordered white, female
  3. Magpie
  4. Magpie Caterpillar


  PLATE XXXVIII

  1. Spring Usher
  2. Winter Moth, male
  3. Winter Moth, female


  PLATE XXXIX

  1. Mottled Umber, male
  2. Mottled Umber, female
  3. Mottled Umber Caterpillar


  PLATE XL

  1. Garden Carpet
  2. Yellow Shell
  3. Pebble Hook-tip


  PLATE XLI

  1. Puss
  2. Puss Caterpillar


  PLATE XLII

  1. Lobster
  2. Lobster Caterpillar


  PLATE XLIII

  1. Buff Tip
  2. Buff Tip Caterpillar


  PLATE XLIV

  1. Figure of Eight
  2. Peach Blossom
  3. Grey Dagger


  PLATE XLV

  1. Large Yellow Underwing
  2. Red Underwing


  PLATE XLVI

  1. Pine Beauty
  2. Old Lady


  PLATE XLVII

  1. Pink-barred Sallow
  2. Angel-shades
  3. Silver Y


  PLATE XLVIII

  1. Beautiful Yellow Underwing
  2. Orange Underwing
  3. Burnished Brass




BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS




PART I

BUTTERFLIES


PLATE I

THE SILVER-WASHED FRITILLARY (1)

The Fritillaries are handsome golden-brown butterflies, with black
blotches and streaks on the upper surface of all the wings, and a
number of beautiful silvery spots upon the lower surface of the hinder
ones. Nine different kinds are found in Great Britain, but one of
these--the “Queen of Spain”--is very rare indeed, and several others
are very “local”; that is, they are only found in a few places, so that
you are not likely ever to see them. But the Silver-washed Fritillary
is common in almost every large wood. You may see it flying about on
any warm sunny day in July and the early part of August. And it is very
fond indeed of resting with outspread wings on bramble blossoms, while
it eagerly sucks up their sweet juices.

The caterpillar of this beautiful butterfly feeds upon violet leaves.
It is rather a curious-looking creature, for it is covered all over
with thorny spikes, two of which, placed just behind the head, are a
good deal longer than the others. In colour it is black, with yellow
lines along the back and sides. About the end of May it hangs itself up
by its tail to the stem of a bramble-bush, or some other low shrub, and
turns into a fat, humpy, grey chrysalis, spotted all over with silver
and gold.


PLATE I

THE PEARL-BORDERED FRITILLARY (2)

This butterfly is only about half as big as the “silver-washed
fritillary,” for its wings hardly ever measure more than an inch and
three-quarters across. It is very common indeed in woods, where you
may see it flitting about in almost every open space, first in May,
and then again in August. Sometimes, too, you may notice it flying
along a hedgerow by the roadside. The caterpillar, which feeds upon the
leaves of the dog-violet, is black, with white dots and lines, and the
chrysalis is greyish-brown, with paler spots upon the sides.

There is another fritillary, called the “Small Pearl-bordered,” which
is very much like this butterfly. But you can easily tell the one from
the other. All that you have to do is to look at the lower surface of
the hind-wings. For in the Pearl-bordered Fritillary there are only
nine silvery spots on these wings, while in the small Pearl-bordered
there are no fewer than seventeen.

This butterfly also lives in woods, and the two may often be seen
flying about together.

[Illustration: PLATE II

  1. Small Tortoise-shell
  2. Large Tortoise-shell]


PLATE II

THE SMALL TORTOISE-SHELL (1)

This is one of the very commonest of all our British butterflies, and
you may see it in almost any month of the year, for it first of all
appears early in July, and remains on the wing till about the middle of
October. Then it seeks some retired nook, and falls fast asleep until
April or the beginning of May, when it leaves its retreat and returns
to active life for four or five weeks more. And even in the middle of
winter a warmer day than usual will often wake it up for an hour or two
from its long slumber, and you may see it flying about, and evidently
enjoying the sunshine.

If you want to find the caterpillars of this pretty butterfly, you must
look for them on nettle leaves, where you may often see them feeding
together in batches of seventy or eighty. They are grey in colour,
with a black line running along the back and brown and yellow stripes
along the sides, and are covered all over with short, stiff, bristly
hairs. When they have reached their full size they wander away from
their food-plants, hang themselves up with their heads downwards from
a twig, or the side of a wall or a paling, and turn into spiky brown
chrysalids, which are covered almost all over with shining golden spots.


PLATE II

THE LARGE TORTOISE-SHELL (2)

As a rule, you can easily tell this butterfly from the last by its
size, for it is generally nearly half as big again. But just now and
then a Large Tortoise-shell is no bigger than a “small tortoise-shell,”
and then it is not always easy to distinguish the one from the other.
So remember that a Large Tortoise-shell never has any white spots upon
its wings at all, while the “small tortoise-shell” always has two, one
of which is placed close to the tip of each of the front pair.

Large Tortoise-shells are not nearly so common as small ones, but in
some years they are much more plentiful than in others. They appear in
July or August, sleep all through the winter, and then fly about again
during April and May. The caterpillars generally feed upon the leaves
of elms, though they will also eat those of willow and apple and pear
trees. They are brown in colour, with a broad black stripe along each
side, and are covered with thorny black bristles. About the middle
of June they turn into flesh-coloured chrysalids, marked with a number
of bright golden spots, which you may sometimes find hanging by their
tails on tree-trunks and park palings.

[Illustration: PLATE III

  1. Peacock Butterfly
  2. Peacock Caterpillar
  3. Red Admiral Butterfly]


PLATE III

THE PEACOCK (1 and 2)

You cannot possibly mistake this beautiful insect for any other British
butterfly, for on each of its four wings it has a large eye-like
spot, very much like the markings on the tail of a peacock. But the
under-side of the wings is quite differently coloured. It is almost as
black as charcoal. And the consequence is that when the butterfly sits
on the trunk of a tree, with its wings folded over its back, you cannot
possibly see it unless you look at it sideways.

Peacock butterflies are very common in August and September, and again
in spring, after they have passed through their long winter sleep. They
are very fond of sitting on thistle blossoms when the sun is shining,
with their wings widely spread. And you may often see them resting on
ivy bloom, or sipping the sweet juices of over-ripe plums. During the
winter they hide away in outhouses, and sheds, and faggot-stacks. The
caterpillars, which feed in large companies on nettle leaves, are
black in colour, sprinkled with little white dots, and are quite as
thorny as those of the two tortoise-shells. Look for them in June and
July. The chrysalids are green, with their heads and bodies rather
brighter than their tails, and with a number of gold spots.


PLATE III

THE RED ADMIRAL (3)

I really think that this is the very handsomest of all our British
butterflies; for its wings are of the glossiest possible black above,
with spots of the purest possible white, and streaks of the brightest
possible scarlet. And on their lower surface so many different tints
of grey and pink and brown and red are mingled together that I cannot
possibly describe them. All that I can do is to advise you to try to
catch one of these butterflies and look at it for yourself; and if you
do, I am quite sure that you will say that you have never seen a more
beautiful insect.

Red Admiral butterflies are nearly always very common from August till
October, and again in April and May, and are quite as fond of ivy bloom
and the juices of ripe fruits as peacocks. On almost any warm sunny day
you may see them flying about in gardens, or on the borders of woods.
Their thorny caterpillars, which are yellowish-grey in colour with
black markings, and with light yellow lines on each side, may be found
feeding on nettle leaves, though not in large companies like those of
peacocks and small tortoise-shells. The chrysalids are brown, with gold
spots.

[Illustration: PLATE IV

  1. Painted Lady
  2. Marbled White]


PLATE IV

THE PAINTED LADY (1)

In days of old this was not at all a common insect. But in the year
1877 a vast swarm of Painted Ladies came flying across the Straits of
Dover, and spread to almost all parts of England. And since then this
pretty butterfly has been a good deal more plentiful. But it is much
commoner in some years than it is in others. If you want to find it,
the very best place to look is a field of red clover in full blossom.
The next best place is a field of lucerne. And the next best place to
that is a good steep railway bank covered with flowers. But you may
often see it resting on thistles and teasels with peacocks and small
tortoise-shells.

The caterpillar of this pretty butterfly feeds upon thistle leaves;
and for the first fortnight of its life it lives in a sort of little
chamber, which it makes by fastening the tips of several leaves
together by means of silken threads. It is covered all over with thorny
bristles and is brown in colour, with yellow stripes down the back and
sides. If you want to find it, you should look for it in June. And when
it is fully fed it turns into a brown and grey chrysalis, marked with
a number of silver spots. The butterfly comes out in August, and lives
till the following May.


PLATE IV

THE MARBLED WHITE (2)

Although its colours are only glossy black and creamy-white, this is
one of the prettiest of all our British butterflies. But it is quite
possible to live all one’s life in the country without ever seeing it,
because it is so very “local.” In one field, perhaps, or on one little
patch of ground on a grassy hillside, it may be very common indeed,
and you may often see fifteen or twenty of the graceful little insects
flying about together. And yet you may hunt for miles and miles in
every direction, and not see a single one anywhere else.

If you ever happen to find the caterpillar of this butterfly, you can
recognise it at once by its colouring, for it has a pale green body
with a yellow stripe running along each side, and a reddish head. And
besides this there are two reddish spikes at the end of the body,
forming a sort of projecting tail. It feeds on different kinds of
grasses in September, and then again, after its long winter sleep,
in April and May. Look out for the butterfly in July and the early part
of August.

[Illustration: PLATE V

  1. Speckled Wood
  2. Wall]


PLATE V

THE SPECKLED WOOD (1)

As you walk through a wood on a bright sunny day at the end of April,
or in the beginning of May, you may often see a dark brown butterfly
marked with a number of paler spots, which flits along just in front
of you for some little distance, and then mounts up over your head and
flies back the way it came. This is a Speckled Wood butterfly, or Wood
Argus, as it is sometimes called. Argus, as perhaps you know, was a
heathen god, who was supposed to have a hundred eyes. And his name has
been given to the butterfly on account of the row of eye-like spots
which runs along the margin of the hinder wings.

The caterpillar of this butterfly, which is a pretty little green
creature with a white stripe along each side, and a dark brown one
along its back, feeds on different kinds of grass, first in August and
September, and then again in March. Before it enters into its long
winter sleep it throws off its skin no less than five times and appears
in a new one, which has been forming underneath the old coat. And,
strange to say, it always eats its own cast skins! The chrysalis is of
a beautiful bright green colour, and you may sometimes find it fastened
to grass blades growing beneath trees in woods.


PLATE V

THE WALL BUTTERFLY (2)

I think that you must know this butterfly very well indeed by sight,
for it is extremely common in all parts of the country. Indeed in May,
and again in August, you can hardly walk along a lane, or through a
grassy meadow, without seeing it in dozens whenever the sun is shining.
It is called the “Wall” butterfly because it is very fond of resting
for a moment or two on the top of a roadside wall. But it seems to have
very sharp eyes, for if you walk towards the butterfly it is almost
sure to fly swiftly away, only to return to the same spot as soon as
you have passed by.

Like that of the “speckled wood,” the caterpillar of this butterfly is
green in colour, and feeds upon different kinds of grasses. But you can
always tell it by the fact that it has three pale lines running along
its back instead of one dark brown streak, as well as a rather broader
one along each side. The chrysalis is bright apple-green, with a few
yellowish-white spots, and you may sometimes find it suspended by its
tail from a blade of grass.

[Illustration: PLATE VI

  1. Meadow-Brown
  2. Ringlet]


PLATE VI

THE MEADOW-BROWN (1)

In almost all parts of the country, this is the very commonest of
our British butterflies. From the beginning of June until quite the
end of August you may see it in hundreds and hundreds, flying about
in meadows, or along grassy banks by the roadside. And even on dull,
gloomy days, when all other butterflies are hiding away in some snug
retreat, it flits to and fro just as gaily as if the sun were shining
brightly.

This is one of the butterflies in which the female is not quite like
the male. For instead of having just a small dark spot with a white
ring round it on each of the front wings, she has a large black spot
with a little white dot in the middle. And round this is a patch of
tawny yellow, which occupies nearly a quarter of the whole wing.

The eggs of the Meadow-brown butterfly are laid on different kinds of
grass. When they hatch, the little caterpillars feed for about ten
days, and then hide away among the roots, where they remain fast asleep
until the following spring. In colour they are bright green, with a
white stripe on each side, and when they are fully fed they turn into
pale green chrysalids, marked all over with purple-black spots.


PLATE VI

THE RINGLET (2)

You can easily see why this butterfly is called the Ringlet, for on the
lower surface of its wings it has a number of eye-like spots which are
generally so close together that they form a sort of chain, made up of
several rings. But the odd thing is that these spots vary very much
indeed both in size and number. Generally there are eight quite large
ones on each side, three on the front wings and five on the hind ones.
But sometimes there are nine, and sometimes there are seven; and just
now and then there are only three or four very tiny ones, while you
may sometimes catch a Ringlet butterfly which has no spots at all. The
upper surface of the wings is always dark smoky brown all over, with
only a few very faint spots of a lighter colour.

The best place in which to look for Ringlet butterflies is in grassy
paths through woods, where it is sometimes very common indeed. The
caterpillars, which feed upon different kinds of grass, are very much
like those of the “large heath.” But they only come out to feed during
the night, so that if you want to find them you will have to look for
them with a lantern. They are fully fed about the beginning of June,
and the butterfly makes its appearance in July.

[Illustration: PLATE VII

  1. Large Heath
  2. Small Heath]


PLATE VII

THE LARGE HEATH (1)

This butterfly is very nearly as plentiful as the “meadow-brown,” and
you can hardly walk along a lane or through a meadow without seeing it.
The male is rather different from the female, for he is a good deal
smaller, and has a band of dark brown running down from just above the
middle of the front wings to the centre of the hind margin.

The caterpillar of this butterfly feeds upon couch-grass. It is
greenish-grey in colour, with a reddish head, and has two pale lines
running along each of its sides, and a dark one along its back. When it
has reached its full size it spins a kind of little silken pad upon a
blade of grass, from which it hangs itself up with its head downwards.
Two days later it throws off its skin and turns into a fat little
greenish-white chrysalis, marked with a number of dark streaks and
blotches. Look for the caterpillar in May and the early part of June,
for the chrysalis at the end of June, and for the butterfly in July and
August.


PLATE VII

THE SMALL HEATH (2)

Of course you know this butterfly very well indeed by sight, for it is
extremely common everywhere on heaths and downs and in grassy fields
and in lanes from the beginning of June until the end of September.
You may often see it gambolling about in company with “meadow-browns”
and the pretty little blue butterflies, which are generally so common
at the same time of the year. It is quite a small insect, for it only
measures about an inch and a quarter across the wings; but in Scotland,
strange to say, it is generally a good deal larger than it is in
England.

The caterpillar of this butterfly is a little apple-green creature,
with a darker stripe edged with white running along its back, and
another along each of its sides. It feeds upon grass, and when it is
fully fed it spins a kind of silken belt round a grass-stem, fastens
itself to it with its head hanging downwards, and then changes into a
bright green chrysalis with a short purple stripe, bordered with white,
on each side.

[Illustration: PLATE VIII

  1. Green Hair Streak
  2. Purple Hair Streak]


PLATE VIII

THE GREEN HAIR-STREAK (1)

The Hair-streaks are pretty little butterflies which you can very
easily tell by sight. For, in the first place, they always have a
pale streak, or a row of little white dots, scarcely thicker than a
hair, running across the lower surface of the wings. That is why they
are called “Hair-streaks.” And, in the second place, the hind-wings
have a pair of little tails, something like those of the swallow-tail
butterfly, only of course very much smaller.

Five different kinds of these butterflies are found in the British
Islands, but only two of them are at all common. For the Green
Hair-streak you should look on heaths, in open spaces in woods, on
grassy banks by the roadside, and in other places in which brambles
grow. You can easily tell it from all the other Hair-streaks by the
bright green colour of its lower surface, and also by its small size,
for it only measures about an inch across its outspread wings. The
caterpillar, which is light green or greenish-yellow in colour, with
a row of triangular yellow spots running along each side, feeds on
bramble shoots and blossoms. You may find it in July, and the butterfly
makes its appearance in May and June, and sometimes again in August.


PLATE VIII

THE PURPLE HAIR-STREAK (2)

This is the commonest of the Hair-streak butterflies, for there is
scarcely a wood in which oak trees grow in which you may not find it.
But it is quite easy to walk through a wood without seeing it, for it
nearly always flies at some little height from the ground. And besides
this it is very fond of sitting on leaves and basking in the sun, not
moving for some little time unless it is disturbed. The male is much
handsomer than the female, for the whole upper surface of the wings,
except just the margin, is of the richest possible purple, which seems
to shine and glisten in the light, while in his mate there is only a
purple blotch in the middle of the wings.

The caterpillar of this butterfly is a most odd little creature, and
really looks much more like a little fat slug. It is reddish-brown in
colour, with a number of black marks upon its back. You may sometimes
find it clinging to oak leaves, on which it feeds. When it is fully
grown it generally descends to the ground, buries itself just below the
surface, and turns into a fat little brown chrysalis, from which the
butterfly appears in July.

[Illustration: PLATE IX

  1. Small Copper
  2. Common Blue]


PLATE IX

THE SMALL COPPER (1)

This is a very pretty little butterfly indeed, for the upper surface
of its front wings is of the richest and most glossy reddish-brown,
just like the colour of burnished copper, with nine black spots in the
middle, and a narrow blackish border. The hind-wings are dark brown,
with a broad band of copper running along the margin. It is very
plentiful indeed, and you may see it in hundreds by the roadside, or
on heaths and in waste places, darting to and fro in the hot sunshine,
gambolling with the pretty little “blue” butterflies, or resting on the
lilac blossoms of scabious plants. And it has no less than three broods
in each year, the first appearing in April, the second in June, and the
third in August and September.

The caterpillar of this pretty little butterfly is bright green in
colour, with a red stripe running along each side, and another along
its back. It feeds on the leaves of sorrel plants, and turns into a
whitish chrysalis speckled with black and brown.

Perhaps you may wonder why this insect is called the “Small” Copper.
The reason is that there used to be a much larger butterfly, which was
very much like it, and which was called the “Large Copper.” But this
has not been taken for a great many years.


PLATE IX

THE COMMON BLUE (2)

Everybody knows the pretty little “Blue” butterflies, which one sees
playing about in such numbers in meadows and by grassy roadsides, all
through the summer and the early part of the autumn. But there are
several different kinds of these insects, and that which one generally
sees is the Common Blue. The male and the female are not quite alike,
for the wings of the male are lilac blue all over, while those of the
female are much browner, with a row of orange spots running along the
hind margin. And the under surface of the male is grey, while that of
the female is brown. But, strange to say, “Blues” are sometimes found
with the colouring of the male on the wings of one side, and that of
the female on those of the other!

The caterpillar of this pretty little butterfly is rather hairy, and
is bright green in colour, with a dark stripe running along the back,
and a row of little white spots on each side. It feeds on bird’s-foot
trefoil, rest-harrow, and other low plants, and turns into a small
green chrysalis tinged with brown.

[Illustration: PLATE X

  1. Brown Argus
  2. Clifton Blue]


PLATE X

THE BROWN ARGUS (1)

Although this pretty little butterfly belongs to the family of the
“blues,” it has no trace of blue in its colouring at all, but is dark
brown above, with a row of orange spots along the margin of both the
front and the hind-wings, and either grey or reddish-brown below. It is
very common in most places, and more especially on chalky downs, where
you may often see it gambolling about in company with two or three
“common blues.” And you may also see it flitting about in almost any
meadow, just when the hay is ready for cutting. It appears twice in the
year, first in May, and then again in August.

In shape, the caterpillar of this butterfly is rather like a fat little
slug. It is covered with short white hairs, and is green in colour,
with a dark brown stripe along the back, and a narrow pink streak on
either side. You may sometimes find it feeding upon the leaves of the
hemlock, stork’s-bill, and sun-cistus. And when it has finished growing
it turns into a little green chrysalis with a deep pink stripe on each
side.


PLATE X

THE CLIFTON BLUE (2)

This is one of the loveliest of all our British butterflies, for the
upper side of the wings of the male is of the brightest and most vivid
blue, like that of the sky on a glorious summer’s day, with a white
line running along the front margin, and a black line along the hind
one. The female, however, is not nearly so handsome, her wings being
smoky brown all over, with only just a few blue scales on the parts
nearest to the body. The lower surface of the wings, both in the male
and the female, is greyish-brown, with a number of black spots edged
with white.

If you want to see this beautiful butterfly, you must hunt for it
either in May or in August on the chalky downs in the south of England,
and in the Isle of Wight. But it is one of the “local” butterflies, and
although you may find it quite commonly in one or two places, you may
search for it elsewhere for years, and yet never meet with it at all.

The caterpillar of the Clifton Blue, or “Adonis Blue,” as it is
sometimes called, is green, with yellow streaks. It feeds on trefoils
and vetches, and other low plants.

[Illustration: PLATE XI

  1. Chalk-hill Blue
  2. Little Blue]


PLATE XI

THE CHALK-HILL BLUE (1)

You cannot possibly mistake the male of this butterfly for any other
insect, for the upper surface of both its front and hind-wings is of
the most beautiful silvery greenish-blue colour, shading off into a
blackish band along the hind border. In fact, as a great naturalist
once said, it always makes one think of a bright moonlight night, while
the “Clifton blue” reminds one of the sky on a clear summer’s day. But
the female is so exactly like that of the “Clifton blue” that it is
hardly possible to tell the one from the other.

This lovely butterfly is hardly ever found except on chalky downs, and
is commonest in the south of England. It flies in July and August. If
you want to find the caterpillar, you must look for it in May and the
early part of June. It feeds upon bird’s-foot trefoil and kidney-vetch,
and looks rather like a fat little green woodlouse, with six yellow
stripes upon its back and sides; and if you look at these stripes
closely, you will see that they are really made of rows of tiny yellow
spots. About the middle of June it fastens itself to the stem of its
food-plant by spinning a silken band round its body, and then turns
into a greenish-brown chrysalis.


PLATE XI

THE LITTLE BLUE (2)

This is a very tiny insect indeed. In fact, it is by far the smallest
of all our British butterflies, and you might easily pass it by, over
and over again, without noticing it, for it is not at all brightly
coloured. The female is dark brown above, without any orange spots on
the hind-wings, and even the male has only a faint tinge of blue in
the middle of his wings. Underneath, both male and female are plain
greyish-drab, with rows of tiny black spots enclosed in whitish rings.
So you will have to look for it very carefully indeed if you want to
see it. It is double-brooded--that is, it makes its appearance twice
in the year, first in May, and then again in August. And you may see
it flying about in meadows and on heaths, more especially in chalky or
limestone districts.

The caterpillar of this odd little butterfly, like that of the
chalk-hill blue, is shaped like a tiny woodlouse, and is green in
colour, with an orange stripe running along its back, and another
on each side. It feeds upon kidney-vetch, or “woundwort,” as it is
sometimes called, and turns into a little yellow chrysalis, marked with
three rows of black spots.

This butterfly is sometimes known as the Bedford Blue.

[Illustration: PLATE XII

  1. Azure Blue
  2. Brimstone]


PLATE XII

THE AZURE BLUE (1)

I do not know why this pretty butterfly is called the “Azure” Blue; for
azure is a very bright blue indeed, and yet the insect is not nearly
so brilliantly coloured as the Clifton blue. Indeed, it is lilac in
colour, rather than blue. But sometimes it is called the “Holly Blue,”
and that is a very much better name for it; for one often sees it
flying along by the side of holly hedges, while the caterpillar feeds
upon holly blossoms, as well as upon those of buckthorn and ivy. It
is the first of all the “blues” to appear in the spring, and you may
sometimes see it even in April. And generally there is another brood
towards the end of the summer.

You can easily tell the female of this butterfly from the male, for
her front wings have a broad black border, while that on the wings of
her mate is very narrow indeed. The caterpillar is greenish-yellow in
colour, with a black head and black legs, and a bright green streak
running along the middle of the back. When it has reached its full size
it turns into a small yellowish-brown chrysalis.


PLATE XII

THE BRIMSTONE BUTTERFLY (2)

This very handsome insect is common in almost all parts of the country,
and is one of the very first butterflies to be seen in the spring. On
warm, sunny days in March, or even in February, you may often meet
with it. For it is one of those butterflies which “hibernate”--that
is, it comes out of the chrysalis in the summer or early autumn, and
then sleeps all through the winter in some snug retreat, from which it
is always ready to come out for an hour or two when the weather is a
little warmer and finer than usual.

The male Brimstone is a good deal handsomer than the female, for his
wings are of a bright daffodil colour, while those of his mate are
pale greenish-yellow. The caterpillar feeds on the young leaves of
buckthorn bushes, and is dull green in colour, sprinkled all over with
tiny black spots, from each of which sprouts a slender white bristle,
and the chrysalis, which is fastened by a silken belt round its body to
a twig of the food-plant, is bright apple-green marked with yellow and
purple-brown.

[Illustration: PLATE XIII

  1. Clouded Yellow
  2. Pale Clouded]


PLATE XIII

THE CLOUDED YELLOW (1)

I wonder if you have ever seen this very handsome butterfly alive.
Very likely you have not, for although just now and then it is very
common indeed, it nearly always becomes quite scarce for several years
afterwards, and you may look for it summer after summer without seeing
it at all. It makes its appearance in August and September, and the
best places in which to look for it are clover and lucerne fields near
the seaside. But it is also very fond of flying about on railway banks;
and if you try to chase it _there_ you will find that you will have to
run very hard indeed if you want to catch it! In fact, one butterfly
collector used to say that it was of no use trying to do so unless one
wore a pair of seven-leagued boots!

The caterpillar of the Clouded Yellow butterfly is of a bright
grass-green colour, with a white line on each side, marked with yellow
and orange. It feeds on the leaves of lucerne, trefoils, and clover in
June and July, and then changes into a green chrysalis shaped something
like that of a “large white,” with a pale yellow stripe on each side,
and a number of black and reddish-brown spots.


PLATE XIII

THE PALE CLOUDED YELLOW (2)

Sometimes this butterfly is known as the Clouded Sulphur. It appears
in the same places, and at the same time of the year, as the “clouded
yellow,” but is hardly ever quite as common. Generally, indeed, you may
see ten or twelve “clouded yellows” to one Pale Clouded Yellow. You can
easily tell it by its much paler colour, for its wings are quite light
yellow instead of rich orange, while sometimes one meets with a Pale
Clouded Yellow which is really almost white. And, besides that, the
black border of the upper wings, instead of being nearly the same width
all the way along, is very broad at the top and very narrow at the
bottom, while even in the male it is marked with several yellow spots.

This pretty butterfly is quite a seaside insect, and sometimes it
may be seen fluttering over the waves a long way out from the shore.
Indeed, there seems to be very little doubt that now and then it flies
right across the Straits of Dover, and reaches this country from France!

The caterpillar of the Pale Clouded Yellow is olive-green in colour,
sprinkled with black dots, and with two yellow lines along its back and
another on each side. It feeds on clovers and trefoils.

[Illustration: PLATE XIV

  1. Swallow-tail
  2. Swallow-tail Caterpillar]


PLATE XIV

THE SWALLOW-TAIL (1 and 2)

This is the finest of all our British butterflies, and a most beautiful
creature it is as it flits to and fro in the sunshine. But I am afraid
that you are not very likely to see it alive, for it is only found in
the fens of Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, while even there it is not as
common as it used to be. But if ever you spend a summer holiday in the
Norfolk Broads you may, perhaps, see one of these lovely butterflies
flying swiftly past you.

The caterpillar is almost as handsome as the butterfly. It is bright
green in colour, with velvety-black rings, which are spotted with red.
And just behind its head it has an odd little forked organ, from which
it pours out a drop of liquid when it is frightened. This liquid has a
very nasty smell, and no doubt it prevents birds from feeding upon the
caterpillar.

This caterpillar feeds upon hog’s fennel, wild carrot, and marsh
milk-parsley. When it has reached its full size it climbs up the stem
of a reed, fastens itself to it by spinning a kind of silken belt round
its body, and turns into a yellowish-green chrysalis, from which the
butterfly appears during the following summer.


PLATE XV

THE ORANGE TIP (1 and 2)

You must often have noticed this very pretty insect flying about in the
spring, for it is quite common in almost all parts of the country. And
you cannot possibly mistake the male for any other butterfly, because
of the large patch of orange-yellow at the tips of the front wings.
But the female is without this orange patch, so that you might easily
take her for one of the small white butterflies. If you can look at her
closely, however, you will notice that in the middle of her front wings
she has a small black spot shaped just like the crescent moon, and that
the lower surface of her hind-wings is marbled with yellowish-green.

The caterpillar of this pretty butterfly feeds upon cuckoo-flower, or
“lady’s smock,” as it is sometimes called, and also upon hedge-garlic,
tower mustard, and yellow rocket. In colour it is green, with a white
stripe running along each side of its body. When it is fully fed it
fastens itself by a silken belt to the stem of its food-plant, and
turns into a long, slender, greenish-brown chrysalis, shaped like a
bow, from which the butterfly appears in the following May.

[Illustration: PLATE XV

  1. Orange Tip, Male
  2. Orange Tip, Female]


PLATE XVI

THE LARGE WHITE (1 and 2)

This is a very common butterfly indeed, and even in towns you may often
see it flying about. Indeed it is much too common, for its caterpillars
feed upon the leaves of cabbages and cauliflowers, to which they
sometimes do most terrible mischief. I dare say that you have seen
these plants so stripped by the caterpillars of “Garden Whites,” as
these butterflies are often called, that they look just like skeletons,
only the mid-ribs and the veins being left remaining. And in some
summers these caterpillars are so plentiful that hardly a single
cabbage or cauliflower escapes.

You can easily recognise this butterfly by its size; and you can tell
the female from the male by the two black spots and the narrow black
streak upon her front wings. The caterpillar is green in colour, shaded
on each side with yellow, and is dotted all over with tiny black spots,
from each of which springs a hair. When it has reached its full size
it leaves its food-plant, fastens itself to a wall, or a fence, or
a door-post, or the trunk of a tree, and turns into a rather stout
bluish-white chrysalis, sprinkled with blackish spots. The butterfly
may be seen in May, and again in August.


PLATE XVI

THE SMALL WHITE (3 and 4)

This butterfly is even commoner than the last. Indeed, two butterflies
out of every three which you see on a warm summer’s day are almost
sure to be Small Whites, and they are always very plentiful indeed in
gardens, where their caterpillars often do a great deal of mischief.
You can easily tell them from the caterpillars of the “large white,”
for they are pale green in colour, with a yellow line running down the
middle of the back, and a dotted line of the same colour on either
side. And instead of having short, stiff hairs all over their bodies,
they are covered with a kind of very soft down. They, too, feed upon
cabbages and cauliflowers, but instead of eating away the outer leaves
only, like those of the “large white,” they bore their way right into
the very heart of the plants, and often quite spoil them for use as
human food. Very often, too, you may find them feeding on the leaves of
nasturtiums, and also on those of mignonette.

This butterfly, like the last, appears in the early spring, and again
in summer, and you can tell the female from the male by the two black
spots upon her front wings. The chrysalis is sometimes green in colour,
and sometimes yellow, and sometimes light or reddish-brown.

[Illustration: PLATE XVI

  1. Large White
  2. Large White Caterpillar
  3. Small White
  4. Small White Caterpillar
  5. Green-veined White, under-side]


PLATE XVI

THE GREEN-VEINED WHITE (5)

From a little distance you might very easily mistake this butterfly for
a “small white”; for it is of just the same size, and the upper surface
of its wings is marked in almost exactly the same way. But if you
happen to see it sitting with its wings closed, you will notice at once
that the veins on the lower surface of the hinder pair are streaked
with green or grey. It is not quite as common as the “small white,” but
you may see it flying about in almost any part of the country in May,
and again in August.

This butterfly lays its eggs on hedge-garlic, and also on winter-cress
and sometimes on water-cress. They are most beautiful little objects if
you look at them through a microscope, for they are shaped just like
little tiny sugar-loaves, with ridges running down them from the top to
the bottom, and smaller ridges crosswise between them. The caterpillars
which hatch out of them are darker green above and lighter green below,
with a row of little black spots on either side, each of which is
enclosed in a yellow ring; and the chrysalis is green, sprinkled all
over with the tiniest possible black spots.


PLATE XVII

THE GRIZZLED SKIPPER (1)

Skipper butterflies are common enough in almost all parts of the
country; yet very few people ever seem to notice them. The reason is
that they hardly look like butterflies at all. They look much more like
little grey or brown moths. Yet they are really butterflies, for if you
look at them closely you will see that their feelers have little knobs
at the tips. And that is one of the marks of a butterfly.

It is very easy to see why these little insects are called “Skippers,”
for they seem to _skip_ from flower to flower in a manner quite unlike
the flight of any other butterfly. And the Grizzled Skipper is one
of the commonest of them all. You may see it darting about in May,
and again in August, in open grassy places in woods. But it only
seems to live for a short time, so that although it may be flying
about in numbers one day, two or three days later it will have quite
disappeared. The caterpillar is sometimes green and sometimes brown in
colour, with paler lines along its back and sides. It feeds for a few
weeks on bramble-leaves, and then turns into a dull white chrysalis
spotted with black.

[Illustration: PLATE XVII

  1. Grizzled Skipper
  2. Dingy Skipper
  3. Large Skipper
  4. Small Skipper]


PLATE XVII

THE DINGY SKIPPER (2)

This little butterfly certainly deserves its name. One cannot call it a
pretty insect, for it is just dull, dingy brown all over, with just a
faint grey band running across the middle of the wings. So unless you
look very carefully for it you are not likely to see it. It does not
live in woods, like the “grizzled skipper,” but flies about on flowery
chalk banks in the sunshine, first in May, and then again in August.
And sometimes you may see it in numbers in an old chalk-pit, never
resting on one flower for more than a very few moments, but skipping
about in the most active way from one blossom to another.

The caterpillar of this little butterfly feeds on the bird’s-foot
trefoil, that low plant with yellow flowers which grows so commonly on
chalky banks. If you should ever happen to find this caterpillar you
can tell it at once by its colour, which is pale green, with two yellow
stripes running along each side of the body, and over each stripe is a
row of little black dots. When it has finished growing it turns into a
fat and rather bunchy little chrysalis, which is dull green in front
and rosy-red behind.


PLATE XVII

THE LARGE SKIPPER (3)

The Large Skipper is one of the commonest of all these queer little
butterflies, and you may see it in dozens and dozens, skipping actively
about from flower to flower on grassy banks by the roadside, and in
open places in woods. The male is not quite like the female, for he has
a rather large streak of dark brown running across his front wings,
which look as if they had been scorched down the middle. And the body
of the female is so very stout that she certainly looks much more like
a moth than a butterfly.

If you want to find the caterpillar of this insect you must look for
it on different kinds of meadow-grass. It has a big brown head and
a dull green body, with a dark line running along the back dotted
with black. And underneath, on the hinder part of its body, it has a
number of white spots. When it is fully grown it fastens three or four
grass-stems together by means of silken threads, and then turns to a
rather long and thin chrysalis of a pale brown colour between them.
Look out for the butterfly on bright sunny days in May, and again in
August.

[Illustration: PLATE XVIII

  1. Eyed Hawk
  2. Eyed Hawk Caterpillar]


PLATE XVII

THE SMALL SKIPPER (4)

This queer little butterfly, which is about half the size of the “large
skipper,” is very nearly as common. But it only makes its appearance
once in the year instead of twice, generally about the middle of July.
The best places in which to look for it are grassy banks by the sides
of lanes and open places in woods. But it is so small that unless you
look very carefully you will most likely pass it by. The male butterfly
is not quite like the female, for he has a thin black line running
along the middle of his front wings.

This butterfly lays its eggs on different kinds of grass, and when
they hatch, the little caterpillars feed for a few weeks, and then
find their way into some snug retreat, in which they sleep all through
the autumn and winter. Early in the spring they come out from their
hiding-places and begin to feed again; and by about the beginning of
June they are ready to turn into chrysalids. If ever you should happen
to find them you may know them at once, for they are green in colour,
with six white stripes running all the way along their bodies. And
besides this they are quite fat in the middle, and quite thin at the
head and the tail.




PART II

MOTHS


PLATE XVIII

THE EYED HAWK MOTH (1 and 2)

The “hawk moths” are so called because their flight is so swift and
strong, very much like that of a hawk. Most of them come out soon after
sunset on warm summer evenings, and you may often see them hovering in
front of such flowers as honeysuckle, and verbenas, and petunias, with
their long trunks poked deeply into the blossoms in order that they may
suck up their sweet juices. But if you move in the very least they dart
away at once, so quickly that you cannot even tell in which direction
they have gone.

The Eyed Hawk is one of the most beautiful of these grand moths. You
can easily see why its name was given to it, for the big spot on each
of its hind-wings is very much like the “eyes” on a peacock’s tail. The
caterpillar is pale green in colour, with a very rough skin, and with
seven white stripes on each side of its body, and a curved blue horn
upon its tail. You may often find it feeding on the leaves of apple
trees in August and September. It then buries itself in the ground
below, and changes to a shiny reddish-brown chrysalis, from which the
moth makes its appearance early in the following June.

[Illustration: PLATE XIX

  1. Poplar Hawk
  2. Poplar Hawk Caterpillar]


PLATE XIX

THE POPLAR HAWK (1 and 2)

This is a very handsome moth indeed, which makes its appearance about
the end of May or the beginning of June, when you may often see it
resting on fences, or on the trunks of poplar trees. After dark, too,
you may sometimes see it flying round and round street-lamps; and
just now and then it will come into a lighted room through an open
window. And in August and the early part of September you may find the
caterpillar, which feeds on the leaves of poplar trees, and also on
those of willows and laurustinus. It grows to a length of nearly three
inches, and is green in colour, sprinkled with yellow. And you can
always tell it from that of any other hawk moth by the seven yellow
and white stripes on its sides, and also by the yellow horn on its
tail. About the middle of September it reaches its full size, and then
burrows down into the ground at the roots of the tree on which it has
been feeding, and turns to a rough brown chrysalis with a short spike
at the end of its body, which always looks as if it had been dipped
into very muddy water, and dried without being wiped!


PLATE XX

THE LIME HAWK (1 and 2)

Although it is not quite so large, this is an even handsomer moth than
the “poplar hawk,” for its wings are tinted with the most beautiful
shades of green and brown and brownish-yellow. When it is resting on a
fence or a tree-trunk, indeed, it looks very much like a folded leaf,
and you might easily pass it by without noticing it. The caterpillar
feeds on the leaves of quite a number of trees, such as lime, and elm,
and beech, and birch, and oak. But it much prefers the two first of
these, on which you may find it during August and the early part of
September. It is green in colour, sprinkled with tiny yellow dots, and
has seven yellow stripes on each side, bordered with red. The horn at
the end of the body is blue or green above and yellow beneath, and
underneath it is a sort of flat horny plate, which is purple in colour,
with a yellow edge. About the second week in September it buries itself
in the ground and turns to a reddish-brown chrysalis with a spiky tail,
out of which the moth hatches towards the end of the following May.

[Illustration: PLATE XX

  1. Lime Hawk
  2. Lime Hawk Caterpillar]

[Illustration: PLATE XXI

  1. Death’s Head
  2. Death’s Head Caterpillar]


PLATE XXI

THE DEATH’S HEAD HAWK (1 and 2)

This is the largest of all the British hawk moths, for its outspread
wings often measure as much as five inches from tip to tip. You cannot
possibly mistake it for any other insect, for on its back it has a
patch of short yellow hair which looks just like a skull. That is why
it is called the “Death’s Head.” If you want to find the caterpillar
you should look for it in potato fields in the month of August. It is a
great yellow creature, four or even five inches in length, with seven
blue stripes on each side, and a yellow horn on its tail. And if you
meet with it, and pick it up, you will be surprised to find that it can
squeak quite loudly! Stranger still, the chrysalis can squeak too, and
so can the moth! Indeed, if you pick up a Death’s Head Hawk Moth it
will go on squeaking very much like a mouse all the time that you hold
it in your hand!

The caterpillar of this grand moth feeds chiefly on potato leaves, but
is sometimes found on jessamine and buckthorn. When it is fully fed it
buries itself eight or ten inches deep in the ground, and turns into a
huge reddish-brown chrysalis, from which the moth generally hatches out
in October.


PLATE XXII

THE PRIVET HAWK (1 and 2)

Wherever privet bushes grow you may expect to find this handsome
insect, which is sometimes very nearly as large as the “death’s head.”
One does not very often see the perfect moth, however, for it only
flies by night, and contrives to hide itself away in some secure
retreat during the hours of daylight. But sometimes you may see it at
dusk hovering in front of petunia blossoms, and sucking up their sweet
juices through its long slender trunk. You may find the caterpillar,
however, in almost every garden if you look for it during August or
the early part of September. It is a most beautiful creature, of the
brightest apple-green colour, with seven purple stripes on either
side, each of which is edged with yellow below. And on its tail is a
glossy black horn with a yellow base. It feeds chiefly on the leaves of
privet, but you may sometimes find it on those of lilac and elder. When
it reaches its full size it buries itself in the ground and turns into
a big reddish-brown chrysalis, from which the moth hatches out about
midsummer in the following year.

[Illustration: PLATE XXII

  1. Privet Hawk
  2. Privet Hawk Caterpillar]

[Illustration: PLATE XXIII

  1. Elephant Hawk
  2. Elephant Hawk Caterpillar
  3. Small Elephant Hawk]


PLATE XXIII

THE ELEPHANT HAWK (1 and 2)

If you were only to see this moth itself, and not its caterpillar, you
would be quite sure to wonder why it should ever have been called the
“Elephant” Hawk. For it is not in the least like an elephant in any
way at all. But the moment you look at the caterpillar you understand
why this name was given to it; for the front part of its body is so
long and slender that it really does remind one rather of an elephant’s
trunk. And just behind it, on each side, is a big round spot which
looks like an eye.

If you want to find this curious caterpillar you should look for it
in August on willow-herb and bedstraw plants which grow on the banks
of ditches and streams. Now and then, too, you may find it feeding on
fuchsias in gardens. It is sometimes green in colour, and sometimes
dull grey or brown, and the horn at the end of its body is black, with
a white tip. The moth, as you will see by its picture, is a very pretty
one indeed, and you may see it hovering in front of flowers at dusk in
May and June.


PLATE XXIII

THE SMALL ELEPHANT HAWK (3)

This is a much smaller insect than the last, for its wings only measure
about an inch and three-quarters from tip to tip when they are fully
spread out. But it is one of the prettiest of all our British moths,
with a rose-coloured body, and greenish-yellow wings marked with
rose-coloured bands and spots. It is not at all uncommon, and if you
want to see it you can very easily do so. All that you have to do is to
stand at dusk on a warm evening in June in front of a honeysuckle bush,
and then to remain perfectly still. After a few minutes you are almost
sure to see a shadowy form hovering in front of one of the blossoms.
This is a Small Elephant Hawk; and if you catch it, and wait for a
little while, another one is almost sure to make its appearance in a
very few minutes.

The caterpillar of this moth is something like that of the “large
elephant hawk,” but has three eye-like spots on each side of its body,
and no horn upon its tail. It feeds upon bedstraw, and is generally
found in places where the soil is chalky.

[Illustration: PLATE XXIV

  1. Humming-Bird Hawk
  2. Bee Hawk
  3. Currant Clearwing
  4. Hornet Clearwing]


PLATE XXIV

THE HUMMING-BIRD HAWK (1)

On a hot summer’s day you may often see this beautiful moth hovering in
front of geraniums and other flowers in the garden, with its long trunk
plunged deeply down into the blossoms in order to suck up their sweet
juices. And if you stand a few feet away and listen carefully, you will
hear a low humming noise, which is caused by the rapid movements of the
wings. It looks and sounds, in fact, very much like a humming-bird, and
people who have lived for many years in hot countries, and have then
come to England, have often found it very difficult to believe that
they were looking at a moth, and not at one of the beautiful little
birds which they had known so well.

The caterpillar of the Humming-bird Hawk is greenish-brown, or
bluish-green, sprinkled with tiny white dots, and with a pinkish-white
stripe running along each side of its body. Below this is another
stripe of dull yellow, and at the end of the body is a blue horn with a
yellow tip. It feeds upon bedstraw, and when it has finished growing it
buries itself just below the surface of the ground, and then turns into
a reddish-brown chrysalis.


PLATE XXIV

THE BEE HAWK (2)

There are really two “bee hawks,” which you can recognise at once by
their transparent wings. And as one of them has a narrow black border
to its wings, while the other has a broad one, they are called the
Narrow-bordered Bee Hawk, and the Broad-bordered Bee Hawk. And really
they do look more like very big bumble-bees than moths. They fly by
day, like the “humming-bird hawk,” and you may sometimes see them
hovering in front of rhododendron blossoms on a bright sunny day in
May, and darting away at the slightest alarm with almost the speed of
light. But they are not very common, and in many parts of the country
they are never seen at all.

The caterpillar of the “broad-bordered bee hawk” feeds upon
honeysuckle, and that of the “narrow-bordered bee hawk” upon field
scabious--that common low plant which looks so much like a rather small
thistle. They are both green in colour, dotted with yellowish-white,
and with a brown horn at the end of the body. When they have finished
growing they spin little silken webs on the surface of the ground, and
turn to chrysalids inside them.


PLATE XXIV

THE CURRANT CLEARWING (3)

The “clearwings” are very odd little moths with transparent wings,
which have no scales upon them at all, except just on the narrow black
borders. The consequence is that they do not look in the least like
moths. They look much more like flies, or gnats, or wasps, or hornets.
They nearly all come out in June and July, and you may see them resting
on leaves in the hot sunshine.

Another curious thing about the “clearwings” is that their caterpillars
feed, not upon the leaves of plants and trees, like almost all other
caterpillars, but upon the pith of the stems or the twigs, or even upon
the solid wood of the trunk or the branches; so it is very difficult
indeed to find them. When they are fully fed they turn into chrysalids
with rows of tiny hooks along their bodies, by means of which they can
wriggle their way backwards and forwards along the burrows which they
made when they were caterpillars.

The Currant Clearwing is so called because its caterpillar feeds on the
pith in the young shoots of currant bushes. It is very common in almost
every kitchen-garden, and sometimes does a good deal of mischief to the
currants.


PLATE XXIV

THE HORNET CLEARWING (4)

This is the largest of all the British “clearwings,” and it really
does look so very much like a hornet that most people would be quite
afraid to meddle with it for fear of being stung. But if ever you
should happen to meet with the moth you can tell it from a real hornet
quite easily; for if you look closely at it you will see that its body
is not smooth and shiny, but is covered all over with close, soft
down. The best place to look for it is on the trunks of poplar trees,
quite close to the ground, in June and July; for after it comes out
of the chrysalis it always sits on the tree-trunk for some little
time in order to dry its wings. And you will nearly always find that
it is sitting quite close to the burrow which it made when it was a
caterpillar, and in which it lived for no less than two whole years.

There is another kind of “hornet clearwing,” whose caterpillar feeds in
the stems of osiers instead of in the trunks of poplar trees. But it is
not at all a common insect, and you are not very likely ever to find
it.

[Illustration: PLATE XXV

  1. Common Swift
  2. Ghost Swift, male
  3. Ghost Swift, female]


PLATE XXV

THE COMMON SWIFT (1)

The “swift” moths owe their name to their rapid flight, for they can
all fly very swiftly indeed when they are alarmed. But very often, on
a warm summer’s evening, you may see them in grassy places in woods
_swinging_, as it were, in the air--flying first a foot or so to one
side, and then a foot or two to the other side, over and over again,
just like the pendulum of a clock. And when they are doing this they do
not seem at all ready to take the alarm, so that you can easily catch
them.

Five kinds of these moths are found in the British Islands, of which
the Common Swift is by far the most plentiful. It lives, not only in
woods, but also in lanes and on the borders of fields, and on warm
evenings in June you may see it darting swiftly along almost any
hedgerow. And if you catch a dozen or so you will find that the males
are all spotted and streaked with white, while the females are plain
dingy brown all over. And, besides that, you will see that no two of
the males are quite alike, some of them having a great many more white
markings than the others.

The caterpillar of this moth lives underground, and feeds on the roots
of dumb-nettles.


PLATE XXV

THE GHOST SWIFT (2 and 3)

That is rather a curious name to give to a moth, isn’t it? But the
very first time that you notice the male insect flying about on a warm
summer’s evening you will see why the title was given to it; for it
keeps on suddenly appearing and disappearing, over and over again, just
as if it had the power of making itself visible or invisible whenever
it chose. The fact is that the upper surface of the wings is glossy
white, while the lower is dark brown, and that as the insect flies
you can see the one and not the other. So every time that the wings
are lowered the moth appears; and every time that they are raised it
disappears.

The wings of the female, however, are yellowish-brown, with darker
markings, so that she is not nearly so ghost-like as her mate. You may
sometimes see her flying slowly to and fro in the dusk, and as she does
so she keeps on dropping her eggs, which fall to the ground below.
After a short time they hatch, and out come a number of little dirty
white caterpillars, which burrow down into the soil, and feed on the
roots of burdock, stinging-nettle, and dumb-nettle, and sometimes on
those of hops.

[Illustration: PLATE XXVI

  1. Goat Moth
  2. Goat Caterpillar]


PLATE XXVI

THE GOAT MOTH (1 and 2)

Somehow or other, one does not very often see this moth, although it is
quite common in almost all parts of the country. But just now and then
it flies through an open window into a well-lighted room at night, and
then it looks so big as it goes blundering about that one might almost
mistake it for a bat.

Nearly everybody sometimes sees the caterpillar, however--a great
flesh-coloured creature three or four inches long, with a black head,
and a broad band of chocolate-brown running all the way along its back.
Like that of the wood leopard, it feeds in the trunks of trees, in
which it lives for three whole years; and out from its burrow a dark
brown liquid comes oozing, which smells something like the odour of a
he-goat. That is why the insect is called the “Goat” Moth. When this
caterpillar is fully grown it leaves its burrow, and goes crawling
about in search of a convenient place in which to spin its cocoon; and
this is the time when one generally sees it. The moth appears in June
and July, and you should look for the caterpillar in September.


PLATE XXVII

THE WOOD LEOPARD (1)

This is not a very common moth, but it seems rather more plentiful
than it used to be, more especially near London. You may sometimes
see it resting on the trunks of trees in July and August. Then, if
you examine the tree-trunk carefully, you are almost sure to find the
entrance to the burrow out of which it came; for the caterpillar of
this moth is one of those which feed on the solid wood of trees. The
female moth lays her eggs in the crevices of the bark, and as soon as
the little caterpillars appear they nibble their way into the trunk
with their powerful jaws, and there live for several months, burrowing
backwards and forwards, day after day, till sometimes the wood is
almost honeycombed with their tunnels. Sometimes they live in oak
trees, sometimes in elms, sometimes in beeches, or ashes, or willows.
But the wood that they like most of all is that of apple and plum and
pear trees; so that the very best place to look for the moth is in an
orchard.

If you ever find a Wood Leopard you will notice that its wings are
partly transparent. That is because they have fewer scales upon them
than those of most moths, so that they look rather as if they had been
rubbed.

[Illustration: PLATE XXVII

  1. Wood Leopard
  2. Green Forester
  3. Six-Spot Burnet]


PLATE XXVII

THE GREEN FORESTER (2)

When one first sees this pretty little insect flitting about in the hot
sunshine it is rather difficult to believe that it is really a moth,
for it looks a great deal more like a bright green fly. The best places
in which to look for it are grassy clearings in woods in which mulleins
are growing; for it is very fond indeed of resting on the blossoms of
those plants, where its glossy green wings form a most lovely contrast
to the yellow petals. On dull days, however, it never flies at all; and
even on fine ones, if the sun is clouded over for more than a very few
minutes, all the Green Foresters are sure to disappear.

The caterpillar of this moth is shaped exactly like a tiny woodlouse,
and its legs are so short that you can only just see its feet
projecting from underneath its fat little body. It is dingy green in
colour, with a line of black spots running along the middle of its
back, and a pale stripe along each side. It feeds on the common sorrel,
and when it is fully fed it spins a little silken cocoon among the
leaves, and turns to a chrysalis inside it. Look for the caterpillar in
May and the early part of June, and for the moth about midsummer.


PLATE XXVII

THE SIX-SPOT BURNET (3)

The “burnets” are most lovely little moths, with glossy blackish-green
front wings, marked with bright crimson spots, and crimson hind-wings
with dark green borders. Like the “green forester,” they fly only in
the hot sunshine; but even on dull days you may often see them clinging
to grass-stems in fields and by the roadside.

Several different kinds of these moths are found in the British
Islands, of which the Six-spot Burnet is by far the commonest. On a
hot day about the middle of June you may often see it flying about
in hundreds. And if you look on the grass-stems you are almost sure
to find numbers of its odd little cocoons, which are bright yellow
in colour, and look just like tiny shuttles with very sharp points.
The caterpillars which spin these cocoons, however, feed chiefly on
trefoils and clovers. They are dingy yellow in colour, with rather
hairy bodies, marked with two rows of small black spots on either side.
You may find them towards the end of May, and they spin their cocoons
early in June.

[Illustration: PLATE XXVIII

  1. Cinnabar
  2. Cinnabar Caterpillar
  3. White Ermine]


PLATE XXVIII

THE CINNABAR (1 and 2)

The Cinnabar Moth is really almost a prettier insect than the
“burnets,” and it looks most beautiful as you see it slowly flying over
the long grass in the hay-fields, or along a bank by the roadside,
on a hot midsummer day. For the upper wings are deep olive-brown in
colour, with a broad crimson streak and two round crimson spots upon
them, while the lower ones are rich crimson with a narrow black margin.
And the under surface is coloured just like the upper, except that the
crimson tint is just a little bit paler.

This is one of the “local” moths, for while it is very common indeed
in some places, it is seldom or never seen in others. You should look
for it where ragwort grows, for on that plant the caterpillars feed.
They are handsome little creatures, which you cannot possibly mistake
for those of any other moth, for they are bright orange in colour, with
black rings round their bodies. And sometimes they are so plentiful
that they quite strip the ragwort plants of their leaves. When they
are fully fed they change into shiny reddish-brown chrysalids on the
surface of the ground.


PLATE XXVIII

THE WHITE ERMINE (3)

In most parts of the British Islands this is a very common moth indeed.
You may see it resting by day on fences and the trunks of trees, and
after dark it will often come flying into a lighted room. Or you may
notice it darting round and round street-lamps by night, and doing its
very best to burn itself in the dazzling flame. And the caterpillar is
even commoner in gardens than that of the “tiger” moth. It is really
a sort of small “woolly bear,” for its body is covered all over with
brown hairs. But you can always tell it from the real “woolly bear” by
the pale line which runs along the middle of its back. It will feed on
almost any plant in the garden, and is fully grown about the middle of
September, when it spins a silken cocoon, and turns into a dark brown
chrysalis. The moth appears in June.

There is another kind of “ermine” moth, called the “buff ermine,” which
is brownish-yellow in colour instead of white. The caterpillar is dingy
white, with one white line and two dark ones running along its back,
and is covered with pale brown hairs. You may often find it feeding
upon dock leaves. The moth is quite as common as the White Ermine, and
makes its appearance at the same time of the year.

[Illustration: PLATE XXIX

  1. Garden Tiger
  2. Garden Tiger Caterpillar
  3. Cream Spotted Tiger
  4. Cream Spotted Tiger Caterpillar]


PLATE XXIX

THE GARDEN TIGER (1 and 2)

Most likely you know the caterpillar of this moth a good deal better
than the moth itself; for you may find it in almost any garden feeding
on the leaves of hollyhocks and all sorts of other plants, while you
can hardly walk along a hedge bank without noticing it upon those of
the dumb-nettles. It is called the “woolly bear,” because it is covered
all over with long brown hairs which look something like the fur of a
bear, and when it has finished growing it spins a silken cocoon amongst
the herbage, in which a number of these hairs are always entangled.

But although it is so common one does not often see the moth. For it
only flies by night, and hides away so cleverly during the day that one
very seldom finds it. But sometimes it will fly through an open window
into a well-lighted room, or cling to a street-lamp and gaze at the
flame for hours together.

A curious fact about this moth is that it varies very much in colour
and markings. Indeed, it would not be very difficult to make a small
collection of “tiger” moths, no two of which should be quite alike. It
appears on the wing in July, and you may find the caterpillar in May
and June.


PLATE XXIX

THE CREAM SPOTTED TIGER (3 and 4)

This is not nearly such a common insect as the “garden tiger.” But at
the same time it is a good deal commoner than it seems, for it is such
a sluggish creature that it very seldom flies, and the consequence is
that one hardly ever sees it. It does not vary very much in colour,
for the front wings are always black, with eight large creamy-white
spots, and the hind-wings are orange-yellow, with six or seven small
black spots, and a big black patch near the margin. The body is black
in front, with a white blotch on each side, and orange-red behind with
a row of black spots down the middle; so the insect is really a very
handsome one indeed.

The caterpillar of this moth is quite as woolly as that of the “garden
tiger.” It is almost black in colour, with a red head and red legs,
while the long hairs which cover its body are brown. It feeds upon
chickweed in September, and again in April and May, and then spins
a silken web, in which it turns to a chrysalis. The moth makes its
appearance about the end of June.

[Illustration: PLATE XXX

  1. Gold-Tail
  2. Gold-Tail Caterpillar
  3. Pale Tussock
  4. Pale Tussock Caterpillar]


PLATE XXX

THE GOLD-TAIL (1 and 2)

Of course you know this pretty insect very well indeed by sight, for it
is one of the commonest of all our British moths. You cannot possibly
mistake it for any other, because of its snowy white wings and the
thick tuft of long yellow hairs at the end of its body, from which it
gets its name of “Gold-tail.” In the female moth this tuft is very long
and thick indeed, and she puts it to a most curious purpose. For when
she has laid her eggs she strips off the golden down from her tail and
covers them carefully over with it, leaving the tip of her body almost
bare!

The caterpillars which hatch out of the eggs are most beautiful little
creatures. They are black in colour, with three rows of tiny pimples,
so to speak, on each side, from every one of which springs a little
tuft of hairs. Those of the upper row are jetty-black; those of the
middle row are white; and those of the lower one are bright scarlet.
Besides this, there are two scarlet stripes running down the back, and
just behind the head is a sort of hump, which is bright scarlet also.

You may find these handsome caterpillars on the leaves of hawthorn, and
also on those of plum trees. When they are fully fed they spin a silken
web among the leaves, and turn to chrysalids, out of which the moths
hatch in July.


PLATE XXX

THE PALE TUSSOCK (3 and 4)

You may sometimes see this handsome moth resting on a fence in May, and
“drying” its wings after coming out from the chrysalis. The female is
not quite like the male, for she is generally a good deal larger, with
a very much stouter body, and instead of having a dark brown stripe
across the middle of her wings, as he has, she has two wavy lines, one
rather before the middle, and the other rather beyond it.

The caterpillar of this moth is generally known as the “hop dog”; but
I cannot tell you the reason why, for it feeds a great deal more often
on the leaves of oak, lime, and hazel than it does on those of the hop.
It is one of the loveliest of all our British caterpillars--very hairy,
and of the most delicate pale green colour, with three bands of deep
velvety-black round its body. On its back are four brush-like tufts
of long yellow hairs, pointing forwards, and on its tail is another
still longer tuft of the same colour, which points backwards. When it
is fully grown it spins a very slight silken web among the leaves, and
turns to a hairy chrysalis. You may find it feeding in July and August.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXI

  1. Lackey
  2. Lackey Caterpillar
  3. Vapourer, male
  4. Vapourer Caterpillar
  5. Vapourer, female]


PLATE XXXI

THE LACKEY (1 and 2)

If you look at the twigs of apple trees during the winter-time you will
sometimes find that they are surrounded by bands of tiny greyish-white
eggs, most neatly arranged in rows, which look just like tiny
bracelets. These are the eggs of the Lackey Moth, and when they hatch
a number of pretty little caterpillars make their appearance, and at
once set to work to spin a big silken web among the leaves, in which
they live. They are rather hairy, and have blue-grey heads with two
black spots which look just like eyes, and bodies striped with white,
and blue, and red, and yellow. And sometimes they are so plentiful that
they strip whole branches, and even whole trees, of their leaves. When
they are fully grown they spin yellow cocoons, in which a quantity of
dust that looks just like powdered sulphur is mixed up, and change to
smooth brown chrysalids, out of which the moths are hatched in July.

Lackey moths vary a good deal in colour, for some are light yellow,
and some are dark yellow, and some are pale brown, and some are
reddish-brown. Indeed, you may often catch six or eight of these moths,
one after the other, and find that no two of them are quite alike.


PLATE XXXI

THE VAPOURER (3, 4, and 5)

On any warm, sunny day from the beginning of August till the middle of
October you may see a little brown moth darting swiftly about, with a
curious zigzag flight. First it flies for a few feet in one direction,
then for a few feet in another direction, and then for a few feet in a
third direction, and always at some little height from the ground. This
is a male Vapourer Moth, and a very pretty little fellow he is, with
bright chestnut-brown wings, and a crescent-shaped white mark in the
middle of the front ones. But his mate is not in the least like him. In
fact, if you were to see her, you would find it very hard to believe
that she was a moth at all; for she has no wings, and looks just like a
very fat grey grub. She is so fat, indeed, that she cannot even walk,
and has to spend her whole life clinging to the cocoon in which she
lived as a chrysalis. And when she has covered this cocoon all over
with her little round white eggs she falls to the ground and dies.

The caterpillar of the Vapourer moth is very common. You may find it
feeding upon the leaves of all sorts of trees and plants in the garden;
and you can tell it at once by the row of little tufts of hair, just
like tiny shaving-brushes, upon its back.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXII

  1. Oak Eggar
  2. Drinker
  3. Drinker Caterpillar]


PLATE XXXII

THE OAK EGGAR (1)

If you walk across a heath or a moor on a hot day in June you may often
see a large brown moth dashing wildly about quite close to the ground.
This is almost sure to be a male Oak Eggar. You can always tell him
from the female by his deep chestnut-brown wings, hers being light
brownish-yellow. And besides that, she is a good deal larger than he
is, and has a very much stouter body.

The caterpillar of this moth is a big brown creature, which you may
find feeding upon the leaves of hawthorn bushes in May. You cannot
possibly mistake it for that of any other insect, for its body is
covered all over with short yellow down, just like fur. If you touch
it, or frighten it in any way, it at once drops to the ground and
curls itself up into a ring; and then you notice a number of black
bands round its body, which are really formed by the dark skin showing
through the fur.

Early in June this caterpillar spins a dark brown cocoon and changes to
a brown chrysalis, out of which the moth hatches about a fortnight or
three weeks later.


PLATE XXXII

THE DRINKER (2 and 3)

This seems rather an odd name to give to a moth, doesn’t it? But it
really belongs to the caterpillar, which you may often see drinking
the dewdrops on the long grass on which it feeds. It is a very hairy
caterpillar, of a dark brown colour, with yellow spots and streaks upon
its sides, and little tufts of short white down between them. I would
advise you to be very careful in handling it, for its long hairs have
a way of working themselves into one’s skin, and causing big swellings
and a great deal of irritation. Indeed, if you were to rub your eyes
after handling one of these caterpillars, you would run a good deal of
risk of losing your sight!

Drinker caterpillars are very common indeed in some places, and you
may often see them feeding on the long grass by the roadside in May.
About the beginning of June they spin shuttle-shaped yellow cocoons,
which are always fastened to stout grass-stems, and turn to dark brown
chrysalids, out of which the moths hatch in July. The male moth, like
that of the “oak eggar,” is a good deal smaller than the female, and is
much darker in colour.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIII

  1. Lappet
  2. Lappet Caterpillar]


PLATE XXXIII

THE LAPPET (1 and 2)

When this moth first hatches out of the chrysalis it is really a very
beautiful insect, for although the wings are reddish-brown all over,
they have a kind of purple bloom on them, just like that on a ripe
plum. But after a day or two this bloom always gets worn off. The
moth is not at all an uncommon one, and yet one hardly ever sees it.
The reason is that when it sits with its wings folded together over
its back, as it almost always does, it is exactly like a dead leaf.
You might look straight at it from only a few inches away, and never
imagine for a moment that it was really a moth. And if it is hard to
see the moth, it is still harder to see the caterpillar, which flattens
itself against the branches of blackthorn bushes, and looks just like a
piece of rather rough bark.

You may find this caterpillar--if you look for it _very_ carefully
indeed--in May and June. A little before midsummer it spins a long
blackish cocoon, either among the leaves of its food-plant or amongst
grass quite close to the ground, and changes to a smooth black
chrysalis, out of which the moth appears early in July.


PLATE XXXIV

THE SWALLOW-TAILED MOTH (1 and 2)

You may often see this handsome moth flying about in the garden on
warm evenings in July; and during the daytime you may sometimes shake
it out of ivy, or out of the leaves of a thick bush, in which it has
taken refuge from the unwelcome daylight. It is easy to see why it is
called the “Swallow-tailed” Moth, for on the hind-wings are two little
“tails,” very much like those of the “swallow-tailed butterfly.”

The caterpillar of this moth is one of those which we call “loopers,”
because instead of walking as other caterpillars do, they hunch
themselves up into a sort of loop at every step. And sometimes they are
called “stick-caterpillars,” because their bodies are so like bits of
twig that as long as they do not move it is very difficult indeed to
see them.

If you shake the branches of a tree in summer-time you will generally
see several of these caterpillars swinging in the air, each at the end
of a silken thread; and if you want to find that of the Swallow-tailed
Moth you should look for it on willow, and lime, and elder, and pear
trees. When it is fully grown it spins a cocoon just like a little
hammock, and turns to a light brown chrysalis spotted with black.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIV

  1. Swallow-tail Moth
  2. Swallow-tail Caterpillar
  3. Emperor
  4. Emperor Caterpillar]


PLATE XXXIV

THE EMPEROR (3 and 4)

This is one of the handsomest of all our British moths, and the
caterpillar is even more beautiful than the moth. For it is of the
brightest apple-green colour, with ten or eleven velvety-black rings
round its body; and every ring has a number of raised pink spots upon
it, with six black bristles springing from each spot, and spreading
outwards in the form of a star. You may often find it on bramble-leaves
early in September, and it also feeds on blackthorn, willow, and heath.

When this lovely caterpillar has reached its full size, it spins a most
curious cocoon, shaped something like a little flask, with a number of
bristles inside the entrance arranged in such a way, that while the
moth can crawl out quite easily when it is ready to hatch, none of its
enemies can crawl in. In this cocoon the chrysalis lies all through the
winter, and the moth makes its appearance in April, when you may often
see it flying about in the sunshine on heaths and commons. The male is
rather smaller than the female, and you can always recognise him by his
brighter colouring, and his beautifully plumed feelers.


PLATE XXXV

THE BRIMSTONE MOTH (1)

There is a Brimstone Moth, just as there is a “brimstone butterfly,”
and you may find it very commonly indeed in almost any part of the
country, and at almost any time from April until October, or even
November. During the daytime it generally hides away among the leaves
of ivy, or of some thick bush, like the “swallow-tailed moth.” But you
may sometimes see it resting on a fence, or on the trunk of a tree; and
after dark it often comes flying into a lighted room through an open
window. The caterpillar feeds on hawthorn, and blackthorn, and apple,
and sometimes on bramble. It is pale brown in colour, with a bluish
spot on each side of its neck, and with three little humps on its back,
just like the tiny leaf-buds on a bit of twig. So although it is so
common you will not find it unless you look very carefully indeed, and
even the sharp eyes of the insect-eating birds often pass it by. As
soon as it reaches its full size it spins a thick silken cocoon and
turns into a brown chrysalis, out of which the moth appears two or
three weeks later.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXV

  1. Brimstone
  2. Canary-Shouldered Thorn
  3. Pepper and Salt]


PLATE XXXV

THE CANARY-SHOULDERED THORN (2)

There are several different kinds of “Thorn” moths, but you can always
tell the Canary-Shouldered Thorn from the others by just looking at the
middle part of its body, which is thickly covered with very long hairs
of a bright canary yellow. It appears on the wing in August, and is
very fond of flying into a lighted room after dark. Sometimes, too, it
will sit on the glass of a street-lamp and remain there all night long
without moving, gazing at the flame within. If it can get inside the
lamp, it will often burn its wings so badly that it cannot fly away.
And just now and then you may find it sitting on a fence, or on the
trunk of a tree.

The caterpillar of this moth is one of the “loopers,” and is dark brown
in colour, with lighter markings, and with two little humps on its
back. Look for it on the leaves of birch, lime, elder, oak, and fruit
trees during the month of June. About the first week in July it spins
a little silken cocoon, and turns into a light brown chrysalis, with a
few whitish markings.


PLATE XXXV

THE PEPPER AND SALT MOTH (3)

No doubt you will think that this is rather an odd name to give to
a moth, but it is a very suitable one, for the wings of this insect
really do look very much as if they had been first covered with salt,
and then sprinkled thickly with black pepper. But it varies a good deal
in its markings, for sometimes the wings look as if they were nearly
all salt, and sometimes they look as if they were nearly all pepper.
And if the moth is caught in the north of England or in Scotland,
strange to say, it is nearly always much darker than when it is caught
in the south.

The caterpillar, too, varies almost as much in colour as the moth.
Sometimes it is reddish-brown; sometimes it is greenish-brown;
sometimes it is yellowish-brown. But it always looks very much like a
piece of stick; and it always has eight raised reddish spots on its
back, which look just like buds before they begin to burst into leaf.
You may find it in August, feeding on the leaves of lime, birch, and
oak trees. In September it buries itself in the ground, and changes
to a rather fat brown chrysalis, out of which the moth appears in the
following May.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVI

  1. Willow Beauty
  2. Large Emerald]


PLATE XXXVI

THE WILLOW BEAUTY (1)

I am sorry to say that I cannot tell you why this moth is called the
“Willow Beauty.” For, in the first place, it is not a very beautiful
insect. Both its front and hinder wings are greyish-brown all over,
with a few wavy black lines running across them, and one pale zigzag
streak near the outer margin. Certainly, one would hardly call it a
“beauty.” And then, in the second place, it has nothing to do with
willow trees; for its grey, twig-like caterpillar feeds on the leaves
of rose-bushes, and plum trees, and pear trees, and birch trees, and
sometimes on those of lilac and elder, but never on the leaves of
willows.

This moth is a very common one indeed in all parts of the country, and
from the middle of June until the beginning of August you may see it in
numbers, resting with outspread wings on fences and tree-trunks during
the day, and fluttering round gas-lamps in the evening.

There is another moth which is very like the “willow beauty,” but is
nearly twice as big, and is rather lighter in colour. This is called
the “great oak beauty,” and you may sometimes see it resting on the
trunks of oak trees in June.


PLATE XXXVI

THE LARGE EMERALD (2)

The “emeralds” are pale green moths with very delicate wings, and the
Large Emerald is the finest and most beautiful of them all. It is
almost as large as the “swallow-tail moth,” and when it first comes out
of the chrysalis its wings are of the most lovely green colour, with
three wavy white lines across the front pair, and a scalloped white
line and a row of white dots across the hinder ones. But after two
or three days it begins to fade; and if you were to put it away in a
collection you would most likely find after a few months that it was
nearly white.

The Large Emerald is not a very common moth, but you may sometimes
find it by shaking bushes and the branches of trees in June and July.
The caterpillar feeds on the leaves of birch and elm, and is green in
colour, with a yellow line along each side, and six pairs of little
reddish bumps which look like tiny buds. About the end of May it forms
a kind of cocoon by spinning together two or three leaves of its
food-plant, and turns into a brownish-green chrysalis, with two rows of
reddish spots on its back.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVII

  1. Bordered White, male
  2. Bordered White, female
  3. Magpie
  4. Magpie Caterpillar]


PLATE XXXVII

THE BORDERED WHITE (1 and 2)

If you want to find this handsome moth, the best way to do so is to
shake the branches of fir trees with a long stick during the month of
May. Then you are almost sure to see it flying off in a great hurry to
seek for refuge somewhere else. But it never seems quite happy unless
it can hide away among the needle-like leaves of a fir tree. The male
is very different in appearance from the female, for his wings are
either white or yellowish-white in colour, with a broad black border,
while hers are orange-brown all over, with only two narrow dark bands.
And, besides that, his feelers are beautifully plumed, while hers are
just like threads. In fact, the male and female are so unlike one
another that, if you did not know what they were, you would be almost
sure to take them for two perfectly different insects.

The caterpillar of this moth is a very pretty little creature of a pale
green colour, with a broad white line along the back and a bluish-white
line below it; then a yellow line below that; and then a row of orange
spots. You may sometimes find it in August, feeding on the leaves of
fir trees.


PLATE XXXVII

THE MAGPIE MOTH (3 and 4)

This is called the Magpie Moth because its wings are chiefly black and
white in colour, like the plumage of a magpie. But there are two orange
bands on the front wings as well, and the body is orange, spotted with
black. It varies a good deal in colouring however, for sometimes there
are hardly any black markings on the wings, and sometimes there are
hardly any white ones. And just now and then you may meet with a very
odd Magpie Moth indeed, with the wings on one side of its body a good
deal larger than those on the other!

This is a very common moth indeed, and you may shake it out of the
bushes in almost any garden in July and the early part of August. And
you may also find its caterpillars feeding on the leaves of currant and
raspberry and gooseberry bushes. It is creamy-white in colour, with
rows of large black spots, and a yellow stripe along each side, and
turns into a dark brown chrysalis with orange bands round it. And it
seems to have a very nasty taste, for no bird will ever attempt to eat
it.

This insect is sometimes known as the Currant Moth.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXVIII

  1. Spring Usher
  2. Winter Moth, male
  3. Winter Moth, female]


PLATE XXXVIII

THE SPRING USHER (1)

This very pretty moth is one of the first to make its appearance after
the winter is over, for you may see it resting on fences and walls in
March, and sometimes even in February. But you may easily pass it by
without noticing it, for it is very fond of sitting among splashes of
mud, which it resembles so much that you may look straight at it from
a distance of only a few feet, without seeing what it really is. It
varies in colour almost as much as the magpie moth, for sometimes it is
nearly white all over, and sometimes it is nearly black; but generally
the wings are greyish-white, with a few narrow black stripes.

When you see one of these moths, however, you may be quite sure that
it is a male; for the female has no wings at all, and looks just like
a little greyish-white grub, with six rather long legs. She lays her
eggs on the twigs of oak trees, and the little caterpillars hatch out
in May. I cannot describe them, for they are all sorts of different
colours, so that you may easily find fifteen or twenty, no two of which
are quite alike.


PLATE XXXVIII

THE WINTER MOTH (2 and 3)

This is perhaps the very commonest of all our British moths. It
simply swarms in all parts of the country, and on any mild day from
the beginning of November till the end of January you may see it in
hundreds, resting on fences and tree-trunks. And after dark it visits
almost every street-lamp, and sits on the glass gazing at the flame
within. But if you want to see the female you must look for her very
carefully, for she is a little grub-like creature with hardly any wings
at all, very much like that of the “spring usher,” except that she is
brown instead of white. You may often find her hiding in the cracks of
the bark of fruit trees, to which the caterpillars sometimes do a very
great deal of damage.

These caterpillars differ a good deal in colouring, for sometimes they
are light green, and sometimes they are dark green, and sometimes they
are smoky brown. But they always have a black stripe down the back, and
three white ones on either side. There is hardly a tree or a bush on
the leaves of which they do not feed, and in May and June you may often
see them in thousands and thousands.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXIX

  1. Mottled Umber, male
  2. Mottled Umber, female
  3. Mottled Umber Caterpillar]


PLATE XXXIX

THE MOTTLED UMBER (1, 2, and 3)

Towards the end of October, and all through the month of November, you
may often find this handsome moth resting on fences, or on the trunks
of trees. But although it is so brightly coloured you may easily pass
it by without seeing it, for it looks almost exactly like a piece
of dead and withered leaf. The male varies a good deal in markings.
Sometimes, for instance, he has no dark streaks on his wings at all,
but is reddish-brown all over, sprinkled with very tiny blackish dots.
But the female is always grub-like, with such very tiny wings that you
can hardly see them. You can tell her from that of any other of the
“winter moths” by the two rows of large black spots which run all down
her yellowish-brown body.

The caterpillars of this moth are very plentiful indeed. In colour
they are reddish-brown above, with a broad yellow stripe on each side,
and greenish-yellow beneath. They feed upon the leaves of hazel, oak,
birch, sloe, and ever so many other trees and bushes. And if you walk
through a wood in May or June, after a strong wind has been blowing,
you may often see numbers of them swinging in the air, each suspended
from a twig or a leaf by a slender silken thread.


PLATE XL

THE GARDEN CARPET (1)

This is another of our very commonest British moths. You may find it
in dozens, and even in hundreds, in almost any garden, just by shaking
the bushes or the branches of the trees. And very often you may see it
resting on a wall, or on a fence, or fluttering about in a lighted room
at night. It is fond, too, of hiding in outhouses and sheds, or behind
a piece of loose bark on the trunk of a dead tree. In fact, there is
hardly any place where you may _not_ find it, from the beginning of
May until the end of September, and sometimes even later still. And if
you wanted to catch a hundred, or five hundred, or a thousand Garden
Carpets, you could very easily do so.

The caterpillars, of course, are quite as common as the moths. They
are queer little stick-like creatures, and vary very much in colour,
some being grey, and some light green, and some dark green, and some
pale brown. But they always have several arrow-shaped dark markings
upon their backs, with four or five pale blotches behind them. Look for
them on nasturtium leaves, and also on those of cabbage and horseradish
plants.

[Illustration: PLATE XL

  1. Garden Carpet
  2. Yellow Shell
  3. Pebble Hook-tip]


PLATE XL

THE YELLOW SHELL (2)

I really think that this moth is even commoner than the “garden
carpet.” From the beginning of June till the middle of August you can
hardly go into the garden without seeing it. If you look at a fence or
a tree-trunk, there it is sure to be resting with outspread wings. If
you shake a bush or a low plant, or the leaves of a creeper growing
upon a wall, it is certain to fly out. And soon after sunset on any
warm evening you may see it flying about in scores, or even in hundreds.

But although the moth is so very plentiful, one hardly ever sees the
caterpillar. The reason is that it only feeds by night, and hides
away all day long under stones, or beneath small clods of earth, or
at the roots of grass. But if you were to go out with a lantern on a
mild evening towards the end of April, and search carefully on the
grass-stems, you would be able to find it without any difficulty at
all. It is dull green in colour, with a darker stripe along the back,
and two white ones on each side; and underneath its body it generally
has a number of rose-coloured or violet spots.


PLATE XL

THE PEBBLE HOOK-TIP (3)

Five different kinds of “hook-tip” moths are found in the British
Islands, and you can tell them at once by the hook-like tip to their
front wings. The Pebble Hook-tip is by far the commonest of the five.
If you want to find it, the best way to do so is to shake the branches
of birch trees, either in May, or in August, for this is one of the
“double-brooded” moths. That is, they make their appearance twice in
each year, the eggs laid by the spring brood producing moths in the
summer, while those laid by the summer brood produce moths in the
following spring.

The caterpillar of this moth is rather curiously shaped, for its
tail--which it always holds up in the air--is drawn out into quite a
sharp point. It has a grey head and a light green body, with a purple
stripe down the back. It feeds on the leaves of birch trees, and when
it has reached its full size it doubles over a corner of one of the
leaves, fastens it firmly down by means of a number of silken threads,
and then turns into a chrysalis.

[Illustration: PLATE XLI

  1. Puss
  2. Puss Caterpillar]


PLATE XLI

THE PUSS MOTH (1 and 2)

This fine and handsome moth is called the “Puss,” because, when its
wings are closed, it looks rather like a brindled cat. And there are
two or three smaller moths which are a good deal like it; so these are
known as “Kittens.”

One does not very often see the Puss Moth, although it is quite a
common insect. But you can easily find its caterpillars by looking for
them on the leaves of poplar and willow trees in August. They are most
odd-looking creatures--bright apple-green in colour, with black heads,
and with white and purple stripes upon their backs and sides, and with
the front part of the body drawn up into quite a large hump. In front
of this hump are two big black spots, which might easily be mistaken
for eyes. And at the end of the body are two long, slender horns, from
each of which the caterpillar pokes out a pink, thread-like organ when
it is frightened. These organs look very much like stings, but they
are perfectly harmless, so that you need not be in the least afraid to
handle the insect. And the odd thing is that if two or three of these
caterpillars are shut up in a box together, they nearly always nibble
at one another’s horns.

When the Puss Moth caterpillar is fully fed it creeps into a chink in
the bark, spins a tough silken cocoon, and changes into a chrysalis,
from which the moth appears in the following May.


PLATE XLII

THE LOBSTER (1 and 2)

This seems a very odd name for a moth, doesn’t it? And if you were
to see the moth you would be quite sure to wonder why such a title
should ever have been given to it, for it is not in the very least
like a lobster. But the fact is that it has a most singular-looking
caterpillar, with very long legs, five pairs of large humps on its
back, and the end of its body swollen out to a huge size, with two
curved horns on the top. Really it does look not unlike a lobster with
a very big claw, and a great many people would be quite afraid to touch
it. However, it is perfectly harmless, so that if ever you meet with it
you may pick it up without the least fear of being bitten, or pinched,
or stung.

This very odd caterpillar feeds on the leaves of oak, birch, and beech
trees in August and September. When it has finished growing it spins
two or three leaves together by means of a few silken threads, and
turns into a chrysalis between them, from which the moth hatches out in
the following May or June.

[Illustration: PLATE XLII

  1. Lobster
  2. Lobster Caterpillar]

[Illustration: PLATE XLIII

  1. Buff Tip
  2. Buff Tip Caterpillar]


PLATE XLIII

THE BUFF TIP (1 and 2)

Most people know the caterpillar of this moth a good deal better than
they know the moth itself. I dare say that you have often seen it
crawling about in August and September, always walking very fast, as
though it were in a great hurry. It is a big, rather hairy creature of
a dull yellow colour, with a black head, and with nine black stripes
running along its body; and you may find it in numbers, feeding on
the leaves of elm, lime, and willow trees. Very often, indeed, it is
so plentiful that it strips whole branches of their leaves. When it
reaches its full size it comes down from the tree, wanders off to some
little distance, hides away under dead leaves or at the roots of a tuft
of grass, and turns into a dark brown chrysalis, out of which the moth
hatches in the following May or June.

The reason why one sees this handsome moth so very much seldomer than
the caterpillar is that it always rests with its wings folded closely
against its body, in which position it looks just like a piece of
broken stick. But you may often find it clinging to the trunk of an elm
or a lime tree, or to a long grass-stem growing underneath it.


PLATE XLIV

THE FIGURE-OF-EIGHT (1)

You have only to look at this moth to see why its name was given to it,
for on each of its front wings it has two large white spots with two
small dark spots inside them, one above the other; so that they look
very much like the figure 8. But the inner 8 is always a much neater
one than the outer, which has a kind of blurred appearance, just as if
a drop of water had fallen upon it and made the colours run.

This moth is quite a common one in most parts of the country, and
appears on the wing in September. It only flies by night, so that one
does not often see it; but it will sometimes fly into a well-lighted
room on a dark, warm evening if the window is left open. You can find
the caterpillar, however, without any difficulty at all. All that you
have to do is to hunt for it on hawthorn or blackthorn bushes during
May or the early part of June, and there you are almost sure to see
it--a smoky green creature thinly covered with black hairs, and with a
yellow stripe running down its back, and another along each side of its
body. A little later on it spins a neat little cocoon, made partly of
silk and partly of bits of bark and leaf, which it fastens underneath a
twig of its food-plant. And in this it changes into a chrysalis.

[Illustration: PLATE XLIV

  1. Figure of Eight
  2. Peach Blossom
  3. Grey Dagger]


PLATE XLIV

THE PEACH BLOSSOM (2)

This is really a lovely moth, for on each of its olive-brown front
wings it has five large spots, which are coloured exactly like the
petals of a peach. But if it is put away in a collection these spots
very soon fade, unless the insect is kept in the dark, and after a few
months they become almost white.

The caterpillar of this moth is a very odd-looking creature indeed, for
when it is resting on a leaf of its food-plant it only makes use of
its middle feet, and holds both the front ones and the hind ones up in
the air! Besides this, it has quite a row of little humps on its back,
the front one of which is sometimes so large that it forms a kind of
hood, and partly covers the head! You may sometimes find it feeding
on the leaves of bramble bushes growing in woods in August and the
early part of September. When it has grown to its full size it spins
a slight cocoon of silken threads among the leaves, and turns into a
blackish-brown chrysalis, with a sharp little spike at the end of its
body. Out of this the moth hatches in the following June or July.


PLATE XLIV

THE GREY DAGGER (3)

You cannot possibly fail to recognise this moth if you meet with it,
for its front wings are of a light pearly-grey colour, with a number
of black markings upon them, several of which look just like little
daggers laid sideways. It is a very common insect indeed, and all
through June and July you may see it resting on fences, and walls, and
tree-trunks. A little later you may find the caterpillar, which is
quite as easy to recognise as the moth. It has a rather hairy body, a
black head with two yellow stripes upon it, and a black body, with a
broad yellow streak along the back, and a number of small red streaks
on each side, which are curved in the shape of a bow. Besides this,
it has two humps on its back, the front one of which is black, while
the hinder one is yellow; so that altogether it is a very odd-looking
creature indeed. It feeds on the leaves of beech, lime, poplar,
hawthorn, pear, and ever so many other trees, and is fully fed about
the middle of September, when it creeps into some cranny in the bark,
spins a strong silken cocoon, and turns into a chrysalis.

[Illustration: PLATE XLV

  1. Large Yellow Underwing
  2. Red Underwing]


PLATE XLV

THE LARGE YELLOW UNDERWING (1)

There are several different kinds of Yellow Underwing moths, but this
is by far the commonest of them all. It makes its appearance in June
and July, and although it only flies by night you can easily find it
during the day. All that you have to do is to go to a strawberry bed,
and brush about among the leaves of the plants. Before long you are
quite sure to see one of these moths running quickly about like a mouse
in search of a fresh hiding-place. And, if you try to catch it, it will
take to its wings, fly for a few yards, and then again settle down to
seek some place of concealment among the herbage.

The caterpillars of this moth are very mischievous creatures, for they
eat their way right into the hearts of cabbage and lettuce plants,
and quite spoil them for the table. And as they only feed by night,
and hide away beneath the surface of the ground by day, it is not at
all easy to catch them. They vary a good deal in colour. Indeed, you
may find them of almost any shade, from light yellowish-green to dark
brown. But along the back there is always a yellow stripe, with a dark
line on each side of it, while on the sides there is a row of seven or
eight short black streaks.

You may find these caterpillars from March till the beginning of June.


PLATE XLV

THE RED UNDERWING (2)

As you will see by the illustration, this is a very fine and handsome
moth indeed; but when it is at rest it is very difficult indeed to
see it, for the bright red hind-wings are quite covered up by the
grey front ones, so that it looks exactly like the bark of the trees
on which it is so fond of sitting. If you want to catch it, the best
place to look for it is on the trunks of willow trees, in August and
September. But sometimes you may find it on fences, and just now and
then it will fly through an open window into a well-lighted room by
night.

The caterpillar of this beautiful moth feeds on the leaves of willows,
sallows, and poplars. It is rather oddly shaped, for its back is very
much arched, while its lower surface is almost flat. And, if you touch
it, it only clings more tightly to its foothold, instead of curling
up into a ring and dropping to the ground, as most caterpillars do.
In colour it is ashy-grey, and generally has two dark, wavy stripes
running along the back. When it is fully fed it spins a silken cocoon,
either between two leaves or in a crack in the bark, and changes to a
reddish-brown chrysalis covered with purple bloom, just like that on a
ripe plum.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVI

  1. Pine Beauty
  2. Old Lady]


PLATE XLVI

THE PINE BEAUTY (1)

This is a really lovely moth, which always comes out in the early
spring. If you want to find it, you should hunt for it on the trunks
of pine trees, about three or four feet from the ground. But you will
have to look for it very carefully indeed, for it is one of the most
difficult of all moths to see. The reason is that when its wings are
folded it looks exactly like a little bit of the tree-trunk from which
the outer bark has been knocked off; so that you might easily look
straight at it from only two or three feet away and yet never notice
it. But after dark it is very fond of feasting upon the sweet juices
of sallow catkins, or “palms,” as so many people call them. And if
you were to shake one of these bushes over an open umbrella on a warm
evening about the beginning of April, you would very likely find a Pine
Beauty lying inside it with its wings folded, and pretending to be dead.

The caterpillar of this moth is either pale brown, or bright green, or
dark green in colour, with five white stripes running along its body,
one on the back, and two on each side. It feeds on the leaves of the
Scotch fir in June and July.


PLATE XLVI

THE OLD LADY (2)

If you were to ask me why this moth should be called the “Old Lady,” I
am not quite sure that I could tell you. But I think the reason must
be that old ladies mostly dress in dark grey, or dark brown, or black,
which are just the colours of the wings of the moth. It is quite a
common insect in most parts of the country, and yet one very seldom
sees it; for it always hides away during the daytime in some dark nook
or cranny, where it is not very easily found. Perhaps the best place to
look for it is inside a boat-house, or a summer-house, or a shed, about
the end of July or during the first or second week in August. And if
you find it, and frighten it away, it will very often come back again
in a short time to exactly the same spot.

The caterpillar of this moth feeds on the leaves of various fruit
trees, on which you may find it in May. It has a smooth, velvety body
of a dingy brown colour, with a number of paler and darker markings,
and on the back is a row of eight dark spots shaped just like lozenges.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVII

  1. Pink-barred Sallow
  2. Angle-shades
  3. Silver Y]


PLATE XLVII

THE PINK-BARRED SALLOW (1)

This is one of the most beautiful of all our British moths, for
its front wings are of the most lovely orange-yellow, with a broad
purple-pink band running across them, and several blotches and spots
of the same colour on each side of it, while the hind-wings are light
yellow, with a darker border. It comes out in September and October,
and the best way to find it is to search on ivy blossoms on a warm,
still evening, by the help of a bull’s-eye lantern. A great many
moths are very fond of these blossoms, and sometimes you may see them
feasting on the nectar in hundreds, or even in thousands, with their
little eyes gleaming like balls of coloured fire in the light of the
lantern. And just here and there among them you are almost sure to
notice a Pink-barred Sallow.

The caterpillar of this moth feeds first of all upon the catkins of
sallow bushes. But when they begin to die off it goes down to the
ground, and feeds upon the leaves of plantains and other low plants
instead. In colour it is reddish-brown, with a number of brown, red,
yellow, and white dots all over its body.


PLATE XLVII

THE ANGLE-SHADES (2)

This is a very common moth indeed, but a very difficult one to see. For
when it is at rest it always folds its yellowish-brown and olive-green
wings closely round its body, and looks so like a shrivelled piece of
dead leaf that it is very hard indeed to believe that it is really a
moth. It is double-brooded, coming out first in May, and then again in
September and October. But it always seems much more plentiful in the
autumn than in the spring, and you can generally find it in numbers by
looking on the blossoms of ivy on a warm evening. And you will notice
that the hairs on the “thorax,” or middle part of its body, are so long
that they form a kind of ruff all round its neck.

The caterpillar of the Angle-shades is either grass-green in colour or
light brown, powdered thickly with tiny white dots, and with a pale
white line running down the middle of its back. It feeds on nettle,
chickweed, primrose, mullein, and other low plants, and when it is
fully grown makes a light cocoon just beneath the surface of the
ground, in which it turns to a shiny reddish-brown chrysalis.


PLATE XLVII

THE SILVER Y (3)

This is a very common moth indeed, and if you walk through a field of
clover or lucerne in August or the early part of September, you may
sometimes kick it out of the herbage at nearly every step that you
take, until Silver Y moths are buzzing about you almost like bees. You
can easily recognise it, for in the middle of each of its front wings
it has a mark shaped something like the letter Y, and looking just
as if it were made of polished silver. And you may also see the moth
flying over flowers in the evening, while after dark it often comes
into a lighted room. Indeed, one really wonders whether Silver Y moths
ever go to sleep at all!

The caterpillar of this moth is shaped very much like that of the
burnished brass, and walks in just the same curious way. It is rather
hairy, and is bright apple-green in colour, with six narrow white lines
running along its back, and a yellow stripe on either side. It feeds
on all kinds of garden herbs and low plants, and when it is fully fed
it spins a white cocoon among the leaves, and turns into a shiny black
chrysalis, from which the moth generally hatches out about three weeks
later.


PLATE XLVIII

THE BEAUTIFUL YELLOW UNDERWING (1)

This is really a most lovely little moth. It is something like a very,
very small “large yellow underwing.” But instead of having the front
wings plain light or dark brown, with hardly any markings at all, it
has them bright red-brown with pure white spots and wavy lines, while
the hind-wings are of the brightest possible yellow, with a broad
edging of glossy black.

If you want to see this very pretty insect, you can easily do so.
All that you have to do is to ramble over a heathy common on a hot,
sunny day in May or June, and you are sure, before long, to notice a
Beautiful Yellow Underwing flying about over the heather. It hardly
looks like a moth. It looks more like a brightly-coloured little bee.
And it flies so quickly that you will have some little difficulty in
catching it.

The caterpillar of this moth feeds on heather and bilberry, and is
bright green in colour, with five white lines running along its body.
Down its back is a line made up of short white streaks. Below this,
on each side, is another line, made up of white spots. And lower down
still is a third line, also made up of spots, which run up and down in
a zigzag. Look for this caterpillar in August.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVIII

  1. Beautiful Yellow Underwing
  2. Orange Underwing
  3. Burnished Brass]


PLATE XLVIII

THE ORANGE UNDERWING (2)

There are really two kinds of Orange Underwings, the light and the
dark. But they come out at the same time, and fly about together, and
are so much alike that it is not at all easy to tell the one from the
other. The time to look for them is about the middle or end of March,
and then, if you go into a large wood on a warm, sunny morning, you
may sometimes see them flying about among birch trees. They are very
fond, too, of visiting sallow, or “palm,” bushes, and sucking the sweet
juices from their golden-yellow catkins. But the moment that the sun
is clouded over they seem to disappear, and you will see them no more
until it begins to shine again.

The caterpillars of both the Orange Underwings are dull green in
colour, with yellow lines on their backs and sides, and when they
walk they hunch their bodies up into loops, just like the “stick”
caterpillars of such moths as the “swallow-tail” and the “willow
beauty.” That of the Light Orange Underwing feeds on aspen, and that
of the Dark Orange Underwing upon birch. You may find both in June and
July.


PLATE XLVIII

THE BURNISHED BRASS (3)

This moth well deserves its name, for across its greyish-brown or
reddish-brown front wings its has two broad bands of golden-green,
which shine just like a piece of highly polished brass. It is
“double-brooded,” coming out first in June and then again in August,
and flies soon after sunset on warm, still evenings. If you want to
catch it, the best place to look for it is over beds of nettles, where
you may often see it flying backwards and forwards until it is too dark
to see at all. But sometimes it will fly through an open window into a
lighted room, and buzz about in the most excited way round the lamp or
the gas-flame.

The caterpillar of this pretty moth feeds upon stinging-nettle,
dumb-nettle, and burdock, and sometimes also upon thistle and wild
mint. When it is not walking it always rests with its front legs held
up in the air, and its body gets stouter and stouter from the head
almost to the tip of the tail. It is apple-green in colour, with a
number of white marks on its back shaped just like the letter V.


  Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
  Edinburgh & London




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS, SHOWN TO THE CHILDREN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


